====================================================================================================
TITLE: Abduction
====================================================================================================
TOC:


1. Abduction: The General Idea

1.1 Deduction, induction, abduction
1.2 The ubiquity of abduction


2. Explicating Abduction
3. The Status of Abduction

3.1 Criticisms
3.2 Defenses


4. Abduction versus Bayesian Confirmation Theory
Bibliography
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries





TEXT:

1. Abduction: The General Idea

You happen to know that Tim and Harry have recently had a terrible row
that ended their friendship. Now someone tells you that she just saw
Tim and Harry jogging together. The best explanation for this that you
can think of is that they made up. You conclude that they are friends
again.

One morning you enter the kitchen to find a plate and cup on the
table, with breadcrumbs and a pat of butter on it, and surrounded by a
jar of jam, a pack of sugar, and an empty carton of milk. You conclude
that one of your house-mates got up at night to make him- or herself a
midnight snack and was too tired to clear the table. This, you think,
best explains the scene you are facing. To be sure, it might be that
someone burgled the house and took the time to have a bite while on
the job, or a house-mate might have arranged the things on the table
without having a midnight snack but just to make you believe that
someone had a midnight snack. But these hypotheses strike you as
providing much more contrived explanations of the data than the one
you infer to.

Walking along the beach, you see what looks like a picture of Winston
Churchill in the sand. It could be that, as in the opening pages of
Hilary Putnam’s book Reason, Truth, and History,
(1981), what you see is actually the trace of an ant crawling on the
beach. The much simpler, and therefore (you think) much better,
explanation is that someone intentionally drew a picture of Churchill
in the sand. That, in any case, is what you come away believing.

In these examples, the conclusions do not follow logically from the
premises. For instance, it does not follow logically that Tim and
Harry are friends again from the premises that they had a terrible row
which ended their friendship and that they have just been seen jogging
together; it does not even follow, we may suppose, from all the
information you have about Tim and Harry. Nor do you have any useful
statistical data about friendships, terrible rows, and joggers that
might warrant an inference from the information that you have about
Tim and Harry to the conclusion that they are friends again, or even
to the conclusion that, probably (or with a certain probability), they
are friends again. What leads you to the conclusion, and what
according to a considerable number of philosophers may also warrant
this conclusion, is precisely the fact that Tim and Harry’s
being friends again would, if true, best explain the
fact that they have just been seen jogging together. (The proviso that
a hypothesis be true if it is to explain anything is taken as read
from here on.) Similar remarks apply to the other two examples. The
type of inference exhibited here is called abduction or,
somewhat more commonly nowadays, Inference to the Best
Explanation.
1.1 Deduction, induction, abduction

Abduction is normally thought of as being one of three major types of
inference, the other two being deduction and induction. The
distinction between deduction, on the one hand, and induction and
abduction, on the other hand, corresponds to the distinction between
necessary and non-necessary inferences. In deductive inferences, what
is inferred is necessarily true if the premises from which it
is inferred are true; that is, the truth of the premises
guarantees the truth of the conclusion. A familiar type of
example is inferences instantiating the schema

All As are Bs.

a is an A.

Hence, a is a B.


But not all inferences are of this variety. Consider, for instance,
the inference of “John is rich” from “John lives in
Chelsea” and “Most people living in Chelsea are
rich.” Here, the truth of the first sentence is not guaranteed
(but only made likely) by the joint truth of the second and third
sentences. Differently put, it is not necessarily the case that if the
premises are true, then so is the conclusion: it is logically
compatible with the truth of the premises that John is a member of the
minority of non-rich inhabitants of Chelsea. The case is similar
regarding your inference to the conclusion that Tim and Harry are
friends again on the basis of the information that they have been seen
jogging together. Perhaps Tim and Harry are former business partners
who still had some financial matters to discuss, however much they
would have liked to avoid this, and decided to combine this with their
daily exercise; this is compatible with their being firmly decided
never to make up.

It is standard practice to group non-necessary inferences into
inductive and abductive ones. Inductive inferences
form a somewhat heterogeneous class, but for present purposes they may
be characterized as those inferences that are based purely on
statistical data, such as observed frequencies of occurrences of a
particular feature in a given population. An example of such an
inference would be this:

96 per cent of the Flemish college students speak both Dutch and
French.

Louise is a Flemish college student.

Hence, Louise speaks both Dutch and French.


However, the relevant statistical information may also be more vaguely
given, as in the premise, “Most people living in Chelsea are
rich.” (There is much discussion about whether the conclusion of
an inductive argument can be stated in purely qualitative terms or
whether it should be a quantitative one—for instance, that it
holds with a probability of .96 that Louise speaks both Dutch and
French—or whether it can sometimes be stated in
qualitative terms—for instance, if the probability that it is
true is high enough—and sometimes not. On these and other issues
related to induction, see Kyburg 1990 (Ch. 4). It should also be
mentioned that Harman (1965) conceives induction as a special type of
abduction. See also Weintraub 2013 for discussion.)

The mere fact that an inference is based on statistical data is not
enough to classify it as an inductive one. You may have observed many
gray elephants and no non-gray ones, and infer from this that all
elephants are gray, because that would provide the best
explanation for why you have observed so many gray elephants
and no non-gray ones. This would be an instance of an
abductive inference. It suggests that the best way to distinguish
between induction and abduction is this: both are ampliative,
meaning that the conclusion goes beyond what is (logically) contained
in the premises (which is why they are non-necessary inferences), but
in abduction there is an implicit or explicit appeal to explanatory
considerations, whereas in induction there is not; in induction, there
is only an appeal to observed frequencies or statistics. (I
emphasize “only,” because in abduction there may also be
an appeal to frequencies or statistics, as the example about the
elephants exhibits.)

A noteworthy feature of abduction, which it shares with induction but
not with deduction, is that it violates monotonicity, meaning
that it may be possible to infer abductively certain conclusions from
a subset of a set S of premises which cannot be
inferred abductively from S as a whole. For instance, adding
the premise that Tim and Harry are former business partners who still
have some financial matters to discuss, to the premises that they had
a terrible row some time ago and that they were just seen jogging
together may no longer warrant you to infer that they are friends
again, even if—let us suppose—the last two premises alone
do warrant that inference. The reason is that what counts as the best
explanation of Tim and Harry’s jogging together in light of the
original premises may no longer do so once the information has been
added that they are former business partners with financial matters to
discuss.
1.2 The ubiquity of abduction

The type of inference exemplified in the cases described at the
beginning of this entry will strike most as entirely familiar.
Philosophers as well as psychologists tend to agree that abduction is
frequently employed in everyday reasoning. Sometimes our reliance on
abductive reasoning is quite obvious and explicit. But in some daily
practices, it may be so routine and automatic that it easily goes
unnoticed. A case in point may be our trust in other people’s
testimony, which has been said to rest on abductive reasoning; see
Harman 1965, Adler 1994, Fricker 1994, and Lipton 1998 for defenses of
this claim. For instance, according to Jonathan Adler (1994, 274f),
“[t]he best explanation for why the informant asserts that
P is normally that … he believes it for duly responsible
reasons and … he intends that I shall believe it too,”
which is why we are normally justified in trusting the
informant’s testimony. This may well be correct, even though in
coming to trust a person’s testimony one does not normally seem
to be aware of any abductive reasoning going on in one’s mind.
Similar remarks may apply to what some hold to be a further, possibly
even more fundamental, role of abduction in linguistic practice, to
wit, its role in determining what a speaker means by an utterance.
Specifically, it has been argued that decoding utterances is a matter
of inferring the best explanation of why someone said what he or she
said in the context in which the utterance was made. Even more
specifically, authors working in the field of pragmatics have
suggested that hearers invoke the Gricean maxims of conversation to
help them work out the best explanation of a speaker’s utterance
whenever the semantic content of the utterance is insufficiently
informative for the purposes of the conversation, or is too
informative, or off-topic, or implausible, or otherwise odd or
inappropriate; see, for instance, Bach and Harnish 1979 (92f), Dascal
1979 (167), and Hobbs 2004. As in cases of reliance on speaker
testimony, the requisite abductive reasoning would normally seem to
take place at a subconscious level.

Abductive reasoning is not limited to everyday contexts. Quite the
contrary: philosophers of science have argued that abduction is a
cornerstone of scientific methodology; see, for instance, Boyd 1981,
1984, Harré 1986, 1988, Lipton 1991, 2004, and Psillos 1999.
According to Timothy Williamson (2007), “[t]he abductive
methodology is the best science provides” and Ernan McMullin
(1992) even goes so far to call abduction “the inference that
makes science.” To illustrate the use of abduction in science,
we consider two examples.

At the beginning of the nineteenth century, it was discovered that the
orbit of Uranus, one of the seven planets known at the time, departed
from the orbit as predicted on the basis of Isaac Newton’s
theory of universal gravitation and the auxiliary assumption that
there were no further planets in the solar system. One possible
explanation was, of course, that Newton’s theory is false. Given
its great empirical successes for (then) more than two centuries, that
did not appear to be a very good explanation. Two astronomers, John
Couch Adams and Urbain Leverrier, instead suggested (independently of
each other but almost simultaneously) that there was an eighth, as yet
undiscovered planet in the solar system; that, they thought, provided
the best explanation of Uranus’ deviating orbit. Not much later,
this planet, which is now known as “Neptune,” was
discovered.

The second example concerns what is now commonly regarded to have been
the discovery of the electron by the English physicist Joseph John
Thomson. Thomson had conducted experiments on cathode rays in order to
determine whether they are streams of charged particles. He concluded
that they are indeed, reasoning as follows:


As the cathode rays carry a charge of negative electricity, are
deflected by an electrostatic force as if they were negatively
electrified, and are acted on by a magnetic force in just the way in
which this force would act on a negatively electrified body moving
along the path of these rays, I can see no escape from the conclusion
that they are charges of negative electricity carried by particles of
matter. (Thomson, cited in Achinstein 2001, 17)


The conclusion that cathode rays consist of negatively charged
particles does not follow logically from the reported experimental
results, nor could Thomson draw on any relevant statistical data. That
nevertheless he could “see no escape from the conclusion”
is, we may safely assume, because the conclusion is the best—in
this case presumably even the only plausible—explanation of his
results that he could think of.

Many other examples of scientific uses of abduction have been
discussed in the literature; see, for instance, Harré 1986,
1988 and Lipton 1991, 2004. Abduction is also said to be the
predominant mode of reasoning in medical diagnosis: physicians tend to
go for the hypothesis that best explains the patient’s symptoms
(see Josephson and Josephson (eds.) 1994, 9–12; see also
Dragulinescu 2016 on abductive reasoning in the context of
medicine).

Last but not least, abduction plays a central role in some important
philosophical debates. See Shalkowski 2010 on the place of abduction
in metaphysics (also Bigelow 2010), Krzyżanowska, Wenmackers, and
Douven 2014 and Douven 2016a for a possible role of
abduction in the semantics of conditionals, and Williamson
2017 for an application of abduction in the philosophy of logic.
Arguably, however, abduction plays its most notable philosophical role
in epistemology and in the philosophy of science, where it is
frequently invoked in objections to so-called underdetermination
arguments. Underdetermination arguments generally start from the
premise that a number of given hypotheses are empirically equivalent,
which their authors take to mean that the evidence—indeed, any
evidence we might ever come to possess—is unable to favor one of
them over the others. From this, we are supposed to conclude that one
can never be warranted in believing any particular one of the
hypotheses. (This is rough, but it will do for present purposes; see
Douven 2008 and Stanford 2009, for more detailed accounts of
underdetermination arguments.) A famous instance of this type of
argument is the Cartesian argument for global skepticism, according to
which the hypothesis that reality is more or less the way we
customarily deem it to be is empirically equivalent to a variety of
so-called skeptical hypotheses (such as that we are beguiled by an
evil demon, or that we are brains in a vat, connected to a
supercomputer; see, e.g., Folina 2016). Similar arguments have been
given in support of scientific antirealism, according to which it will
never be warranted for us to choose between empirically equivalent
rivals concerning what underlies the observable part of reality (van
Fraassen 1980).

Responses to these arguments typically point to the fact that the
notion of empirical equivalence at play unduly neglects explanatory
considerations, for instance, by defining the notion strictly in terms
of hypotheses’ making the same predictions. Those responding
then argue that even if some hypotheses make exactly the same
predictions, one of them may still be a better explanation of the
phenomena predicted. Thus, if explanatory considerations have a role
in determining which inferences we are licensed to make—as
according to defenders of abduction they have—then we might
still be warranted in believing in the truth (or probable truth, or
some such, depending—as will be seen below—on the version
of abduction one assumes) of one of a number of hypotheses that all
make the same predictions. Following Bertrand Russell (1912, Ch. 2),
many epistemologists have invoked abduction in arguing against
Cartesian skepticism, their key claim being that even though, by
construction, the skeptical hypotheses make the same predictions as
the hypothesis that reality is more or less the way we ordinarily take
it to be, they are not equally good explanations of what they predict;
in particular, the skeptical hypotheses have been said to be
considerably less simple than the “ordinary world”
hypothesis. See, among many others, Harman 1973 (Chs. 8 and 11),
Goldman 1988 (205), Moser 1989 (161), and Vogel 1990, 2005; see
Pargetter 1984 for an abductive response specifically to skepticism
regarding other minds. Similarly, philosophers of science have argued
that we are warranted to believe in Special Relativity Theory as
opposed to Lorentz’s version of the æther theory. For even
though these theories make the same predictions, the former is
explanatorily superior to the latter. (Most arguments that have been
given for this claim come down to the contention that Special
Relativity Theory is ontologically more parsimonious than its
competitor, which postulates the existence of an æther. See
Janssen 2002 for an excellent discussion of the various reasons
philosophers of science have adduced for preferring Einstein’s
theory to Lorentz’s.)
2. Explicating Abduction

Precise statements of what abduction amounts to are rare in the
literature on abduction. (Peirce did propose an at least fairly
precise statement; but, as explained in the supplement to this entry,
it does not capture what most nowadays understand by abduction.) Its
core idea is often said to be that explanatory considerations have
confirmation-theoretic import, or that explanatory success is a (not
necessarily unfailing) mark of truth. Clearly, however, these
formulations are slogans at best, and it takes little effort to see
that they can be cashed out in a great variety of prima facie
plausible ways. Here we will consider a number of such possible
explications, starting with what one might term the “textbook
version of abduction,” which, as will be seen, is manifestly
defective, and then going on to consider various possible refinements
of it. What those versions have in
common—unsurprisingly—is that they are all inference
rules, requiring premises encompassing explanatory considerations and
yielding a conclusion that makes some statement about the truth of a
hypothesis. The differences concern the premises that are required, or
what exactly we are allowed to infer from them (or both).

In textbooks on epistemology or the philosophy of science, one often
encounters something like the following as a formulation of
abduction:

ABD1
Given evidence E and candidate explanations
H1,…, Hn of
E, infer the truth of that Hi
which best explains E.


An observation that is frequently made about this rule, and that
points to a potential problem for it, is that it presupposes the
notions of candidate explanation and best explanation, neither of
which has a straightforward interpretation. While some still hope that
the former can be spelled out in purely logical, or at least purely
formal, terms, it is often said that the latter must appeal to the
so-called theoretical virtues, like simplicity, generality, and
coherence with well-established theories; the best explanation would
then be the hypothesis which, on balance, does best with respect to
these virtues. (See, for instance, Thagard 1978 and McMullin 1996.)
The problem is that none of the said virtues is presently particularly
well understood. (Giere, in Callebaut (ed.) 1993 (232), even makes the
radical claim that the theoretical virtues lack real content and play
no more than a rhetorical role in science. In view of recent formal
work both on simplicity and on coherence—for instance, Forster
and Sober 1994, Li and Vitanyi 1997, and Sober 2015, on simplicity and
Bovens and Hartmann 2003 and Olsson 2005, on coherence—the first
part of this claim has become hard to maintain; also, Schupbach and
Sprenger (2011) present an account of explanatory goodness directly in
probabilistic terms. Psychological evidence casts doubt on the second
part of the claim; see, for instance, Lombrozo 2007, on the role of
simplicity in people’s assessments of explanatory goodness and
Koslowski et al. 2008, on the role of coherence with
background knowledge in those assessments.)

Furthermore, many of those who think ABD1 is headed along the right
lines believe that it is too strong. Some think that abduction
warrants an inference only to the probable truth of the best
explanation, others that it warrants an inference only to the
approximate truth of the best explanation, and still others
that it warrants an inference only to the probable
approximate truth.

The real problem with ABD1 runs deeper than this, however. Because
abduction is ampliative—as explained earlier—it will not
be a sound rule of inference in the strict logical sense, however
abduction is explicated exactly. It can still be reliable in
that it mostly leads to a true conclusion whenever the premises are
true. An obvious necessary condition for ABD1 to be reliable in this
sense is that, mostly, when it is true that H best
explains E, and E is true, then H is true as well
(or H is approximately true, or probably true, or probably
approximately true). But this would not be enough for ABD1 to
be reliable. For ABD1 takes as its premise only that some hypothesis
is the best explanation of the evidence as compared to other
hypotheses in a given set. Thus, if the rule is to be
reliable, it must hold that, at least typically, the best explanation
relative to the set of hypotheses that we consider would also come out
as being best in comparison with any other hypotheses that we might
have conceived (but for lack of time or ingenuity, or for some other
reason, did not conceive). In other words, it must hold that at least
typically the absolutely best explanation of the evidence is
to be found among the candidate explanations we have come up with, for
else ABD1 may well lead us to believe “the best of a bad
lot” (van Fraassen 1989, 143).

How reasonable is it to suppose that this extra requirement is usually
fulfilled? Not at all, presumably. To believe otherwise, we must
assume some sort of privilege on our part to the effect that when we
consider possible explanations of the data, we are somehow predisposed
to hit, inter alia, upon the absolutely best explanation of those
data. After all, hardly ever will we have considered, or will it even
be possible to consider, all potential explanations. As van
Fraassen (1989, 144) points out, it is a priori rather
implausible to hold that we are thus privileged.

In response to this, one might argue that the challenge to show that
the best explanation is always or mostly among the hypotheses
considered can be met without having to assume some form of privilege
(see Schupbach 2014 for a different response, and see Dellsén
2017 for discussion). For given the hypotheses we have managed to come
up with, we can always generate a set of hypotheses which jointly
exhaust logical space. Suppose
H1,…,Hn are the
candidate explanations we have so far been able to conceive. Then
simply define Hn+1 := ¬H1
∧ … ∧ ¬Hn and add this new
hypothesis as a further candidate explanation to the ones we already
have. Obviously, the set
{H1,…,Hn+1} is exhaustive,
in that one of its elements must be true. Following this in itself
simple procedure would seem enough to make sure that we never miss out
on the absolutely best explanation. (See Lipton 1993, for a proposal
along these lines.)

Alas, there is a catch. For even though there may be many hypotheses
Hj that imply Hn+1 and, had
they been formulated, would have been evaluated as being a better
explanation for the data than the best explanation among the candidate
explanations we started out with, Hn+1 itself will
in general be hardly informative; in fact, in general it will not even
be clear what its empirical consequences are. Suppose, for instance,
we have as competing explanations Special Relativity Theory and
Lorentz’s version of the æther theory. Then, following the
above proposal, we may add to our candidate explanations that neither
of these two theories is true. But surely this further hypothesis will
be ranked quite low qua explanation—if it will be
ranked at all, which seems doubtful, given that it is wholly unclear
what its empirical consequences are. This is not to say that the
suggested procedure may never work. The point is that in general it
will give little assurance that the best explanation is among the
candidate explanations we consider.

A more promising response to the above “argument of the bad
lot” begins with the observation that the argument capitalizes
on a peculiar asymmetry or incongruence in ABD1. The rule gives
license to an absolute conclusion—that a given hypothesis is
true—on the basis of a comparative premise, namely, that that
particular hypothesis is the best explanation of the evidence relative
to the other hypotheses available (see Kuipers 2000, 171). This
incongruence is not avoided by replacing “truth” with
“probable truth” or “approximate truth.” In
order to avoid it, one has two general options.

The first option is to modify the rule so as to have it require an
absolute premise. For instance, following Alan Musgrave (1988) or
Peter Lipton (1993), one may require the hypothesis whose truth is
inferred to be not only the best of the available potential
explanations, but also to be satisfactory (Musgrave) or
good enough (Lipton), yielding the following variant of
ABD1:

ABD2
Given evidence E and candidate explanations
H1,…, Hn of
E, infer the truth of that Hi
which explains E best, provided Hi is
satisfactory/good enough qua explanation.


Needless to say, ABD2 needs supplementing by a criterion for the
satisfactoriness of explanations, or their being good enough, which,
however, we are still lacking.

Secondly, one can formulate a symmetric or congruous version of
abduction by having it sanction, given a comparative premise, only a
comparative conclusion; this option, too, can in turn be realized in
more than one way. Here is one way to do it, which has been proposed
and defended in the work of Theo Kuipers (e.g., Kuipers 1984, 1992,
2000).

ABD3
Given evidence E and candidate explanations
H1,…, Hn of
E, if Hi explains E better than
any of the other hypotheses, infer that Hi is
closer to the truth than any of the other hypotheses.


Clearly, ABD3 requires an account of closeness to the truth, but many
such accounts are on offer today (see, e.g., Niiniluoto 1998).

One noteworthy feature of the congruous versions of abduction
considered here is that they do not rely on the assumption of an
implausible privilege on the reasoner’s part that, we saw, ABD1
implicitly relies on. Another is that if one can be certain that,
however many candidate explanations for the data one may have missed,
none equals the best of those one has thought of, then the
congruous versions license exactly the same inference as ABD1 does
(supposing that one would not be certain that no potential explanation
is as good as the best explanation one has thought of if the latter is
not even satisfactory or sufficiently good).

As mentioned, there is widespread agreement that people frequently
rely on abductive reasoning. Which of the above rules exactly
is it that people rely on? Or might it be still some further rule that
they rely on? Or might they in some contexts rely on one version, and
in others on another (Douven 2017, forthcoming)? Philosophical
argumentation is unable to answer these questions. In recent years,
experimental psychologists have started paying attention to the role
humans give to explanatory considerations in reasoning. For instance,
Tania Lombrozo and Nicholas Gwynne (2014) report experiments showing
that how a property of a given class of things is explained
to us—whether mechanistically, by reference to parts and
processes, or functionally, by reference to functions and
purposes—matters to how likely we are to generalise that
property to other classes of things (see also Sloman 1994 and Williams
and Lombrozo 2010). And Igor Douven and Jonah Schupbach (2015a),
(2015b) present experimental evidence to the effect that
people’s probability updates tend to be influenced by
explanatory considerations in ways that makes them deviate from
strictly Bayesian updates (see below). Douven (2016b) shows that, in
the aforementioned experiments, participants who gave more weight to
explanatory considerations tended to be more accurate, as determined
in terms of a standard scoring rule. (See Lombrozo 2012 and 2016 for
useful overviews of recent experimental work relevant to explanation
and inference.) Douven and Patricia Mirabile (2018) found some
evidence indicating that people rely on something like ABD2, at least
in some contexts, but for the most part, empirical work on the
above-mentioned questions is lacking.

With respect to the normative question of which of the previously
stated rules we ought to rely on (if we ought to rely on any
form of abduction), where philosophical argumentation should be able
to help, the situation is hardly any better. In view of the argument
of the bad lot, ABD1 does not look very good. Other arguments against
abduction are claimed to be independent of the exact explication of
the rule; below, these arguments will be found wanting. On the other
hand, arguments that have been given in favor of abduction—some
of which will also be discussed below—do not discern between
specific versions. So, supposing people do indeed commonly rely on
abduction, it must be considered an open question as to which
version(s) of abduction they rely on. Equally, supposing it is
rational for people to rely on abduction, it must be considered an
open question as to which version, or perhaps versions, of abduction
they ought to, or are at least permitted to, rely on.
3. The Status of Abduction

Even if it is true that we routinely rely on abductive reasoning, it
may still be asked whether this practice is rational. For instance,
experimental studies have shown that when people are able to think of
an explanation for some possible event, they tend to overestimate the
likelihood that this event will actually occur. (See Koehler 1991, for
a survey of some of these studies; see also Brem and Rips 2000.) More
telling still, Lombrozo (2007) shows that, in some situations, people
tend to grossly overrate the probability of simpler explanations
compared to more complicated ones. Although these studies are not
directly concerned with abduction in any of the forms discussed so
far, they nevertheless suggest that taking into account explanatory
considerations in one’s reasoning may not always be for the
better. (It is to be noted that Lombrozo’s experiments
are directly concerned with some proposals that have been
made for explicating abduction in a Bayesian framework; see Section
4.) However, the most pertinent remarks about the normative status of
abduction are so far to be found in the philosophical literature. This
section discusses the main criticisms that have been levelled against
abduction, as well as the strongest arguments that have been given in
its defense.
3.1 Criticisms

We have already encountered the so-called argument of the bad lot,
which, we saw, is valid as a criticism of ABD1 but powerless against
various (what we called) congruous rules of abduction. We here
consider two objections that are meant to be more general. The first
even purports to challenge the core idea underlying abduction; the
second is not quite as general, but it is still meant to undermine a
broad class of candidate explications of abduction. Both objections
are due to Bas van Fraassen.

The first objection has as a premise that it is part of the meaning of
“explanation” that if one theory is more explanatory than
another, the former must be more informative than the latter (see,
e.g., van Fraassen 1983, Sect. 2). The alleged problem then is that it
is “an elementary logical point that a more informative theory
cannot be more likely to be true [and thus] attempts to describe
inductive or evidential support through features that require
information (such as ‘Inference to the Best Explanation’)
must either contradict themselves or equivocate” (van Fraassen
1989, 192). The elementary logical point is supposed to be “most
[obvious] … in the paradigm case in which one theory is an
extension of another: clearly the extension has more ways of being
false” (van Fraassen 1985, 280).

It is important to note, however, that in any other kind of case than
the “paradigm” one, the putative elementary point is not
obvious at all. For instance, it is entirely unclear in what sense
Special Relativity Theory “has more ways of being false”
than Lorentz’s version of the æther theory, given that
they make the same predictions. And yet the former is generally
regarded as being superior, qua explanation, to the latter.
(If van Fraassen were to object that the former is not really more
informative than the latter, or at any rate not more informative in
the appropriate sense—whatever that is—then we should
certainly refuse to grant the premise that in order to be more
explanatory a theory must be more informative.)

The second objection, proffered in van Fraassen 1989 (Ch. 6), is
levelled at probabilistic versions of abduction. The objection is that
such rules must either amount to Bayes’ rule, and thus be
redundant, or be at variance with it but then, on the grounds of
Lewis’ dynamic Dutch book argument (as reported in Teller 1973),
be probabilistically incoherent, meaning that they may lead one to
assess as fair a number of bets which together ensure a financial
loss, come what may; and, van Fraassen argues, it would be irrational
to follow a rule that has this feature.

However, this objection fares no better than the first. For one thing,
as Patrick Maher (1992) and Brian Skyrms (1993) have pointed out, a
loss in one respect may be outweighed by a benefit in another. It
might be, for instance, that some probabilistic version of abduction
does much better, at least in our world, than Bayes’ rule, in
that, on average, it approaches the truth faster in the sense that it
is faster in assigning a high probability (understood as probability
above a certain threshold value) to the true hypothesis (see Douven
2013, 2020, and Douven and Wenmackers 2017; see Climenhaga
2017 for discussion). If it does, then following that rule
instead of Bayes’ rule may have advantages which perhaps are not
so readily expressed in terms of money yet which should arguably be
taken into account when deciding which rule to go by. It is, in short,
not so clear whether following a probabilistically incoherent rule
must be irrational.

For another thing, Douven (1999) argues that the question of whether a
probabilistic rule is coherent is not one that can be settled
independently of considering which other epistemic and
decision-theoretic rules are deployed along with it; coherence should
be understood as a property of packages of both epistemic and
decision-theoretic rules, not of epistemic rules (such as
probabilistic rules for belief change) in isolation. In the same
paper, a coherent package of rules is described which includes a
probabilistic version of abduction. (See Kvanvig 1994, Harman 1997,
Leplin 1997, Niiniluoto 1999, and Okasha 2000, for different responses
to van Fraassen’s critique of probabilistic versions of
abduction.)
3.2 Defenses

Hardly anyone nowadays would want to subscribe to a conception of
truth that posits a necessary connection between explanatory force and
truth—for instance, because it stipulates explanatory
superiority to be necessary for truth. As a result, a priori defenses
of abduction seem out of the question. Indeed, all defenses that have
been given so far are of an empirical nature in that they appeal to
data that supposedly support the claim that (in some form) abduction
is a reliable rule of inference.

The best-known argument of this sort was developed by Richard Boyd in
the 1980s (see Boyd 1981, 1984, 1985). It starts by underlining the
theory-dependency of scientific methodology, which comprises methods
for designing experiments, for assessing data, for choosing between
rival hypotheses, and so on. For instance, in considering possible
confounding factors from which an experimental setup has to be
shielded, scientists draw heavily on already accepted theories. The
argument next calls attention to the apparent reliability of this
methodology, which, after all, has yielded, and continues to yield,
impressively accurate theories. In particular, by relying on this
methodology, scientists have for some time now been able to find ever
more instrumentally adequate theories. Boyd then argues that the
reliability of scientific methodology is best explained by assuming
that the theories on which it relies are at least approximately true.
From this and from the fact that these theories were mostly arrived at
by abductive reasoning, he concludes that abduction must be a reliable
rule of inference.

Critics have accused this argument of being circular. Specifically, it
has been said that the argument rests on a premise—that
scientific methodology is informed by approximately true background
theories—which in turn rests on an inference to the best
explanation for its plausibility. And the reliability of this type of
inference is precisely what is at stake. (See, for instance, Laudan
1981 and Fine 1984.)

To this, Stathis Psillos (1999, Ch. 4) has responded by invoking a
distinction credited to Richard Braithwaite, to wit, the distinction
between premise-circularity and rule-circularity. An argument is
premise-circular if its conclusion is amongst its premises. A
rule-circular argument, by contrast, is an argument of which the
conclusion asserts something about an inferential rule that is used in
the very same argument. As Psillos urges, Boyd’s argument is
rule-circular, but not premise-circular, and rule-circular arguments,
Psillos contends, need not be viciously circular (even though
a premise-circular argument is always viciously circular). To be more
precise, in his view, an argument for the reliability of a given rule
R that essentially relies on R as an inferential
principle is not vicious, provided that the use of R does not
guarantee a positive conclusion about R’s reliability.
Psillos claims that in Boyd’s argument, this proviso is met. For
while Boyd concludes that the background theories on which scientific
methodology relies are approximately true on the basis of an abductive
step, the use of abduction itself does not guarantee the truth of his
conclusion. After all, granting the use of abduction does nothing to
ensure that the best explanation of the success of scientific
methodology is the approximate truth of the relevant background
theories. Thus, Psillos concludes, Boyd’s argument still
stands.

Even if the use of abduction in Boyd’s argument might have led
to the conclusion that abduction is not reliable, one may
still have worries about the argument’s being rule-circular. For
suppose that some scientific community relied not on abduction but on
a rule that we may dub “Inference to the Worst
Explanation” (IWE), a rule that sanctions inferring to the
worst explanation of the available data. We may safely assume
that the use of this rule mostly would lead to the adoption of very
unsuccessful theories. Nevertheless, the said community might justify
its use of IWE by dint of the following reasoning: “Scientific
theories tend to be hugely unsuccessful. These theories were arrived
at by application of IWE. That IWE is a reliable rule of
inference—that is, a rule of inference mostly leading from true
premises to true conclusions—is surely the worst explanation of
the fact that our theories are so unsuccessful. Hence, by application
of IWE, we may conclude that IWE is a reliable rule of
inference.” While this would be an utterly absurd conclusion,
the argument leading up to it cannot be convicted of being viciously
circular anymore than Boyd’s argument for the reliability of
abduction can (if Psillos is right). It would appear, then, that there
must be something else amiss with rule-circularity.

It is fair to note that for Psillos, the fact that a rule-circular
argument does not guarantee a positive conclusion about the rule at
issue is not sufficient for such an argument to be valid. A further
necessary condition is “that one should not have reason to doubt
the reliability of the rule—that there is nothing currently
available which can make one distrust the rule” (Psillos 1999,
85). And there is plenty of reason to doubt the reliability of IWE; in
fact, the above argument supposes that it is unreliable. Two
questions arise, however. First, why should we accept the additional
condition? Second, do we really have no reason to doubt the
reliability of abduction? Certainly some of the abductive
inferences we make lead us to accept falsehoods. How many
falsehoods may we accept on the basis of abduction before we can
legitimately begin to distrust this rule? No clear answers have been
given to these questions.

Be this as it may, even if rule-circularity is neither vicious nor
otherwise problematic, one may still wonder how Boyd’s argument
is to convert a critic of abduction, given that it relies on
abduction. But Psillos makes it clear that the point of philosophical
argumentation is not always, and in any case need not be, to convince
an opponent of one’s position. Sometimes the point is, more
modestly, to assure or reassure oneself that the position one
endorses, or is tempted to endorse, is correct. In the case at hand,
we need not think of Boyd’s argument as an attempt to convince
the opponent of abduction of its reliability. Rather, it may be
thought of as justifying the rule from within the perspective of
someone who is already sympathetic towards abduction; see Psillos 1999
(89).

There have also been attempts to argue for abduction in a more
straightforward fashion, to wit, via enumerative induction. The common
idea of these attempts is that every newly recorded successful
application of abduction—like the discovery of Neptune, whose
existence had been postulated on explanatory grounds (see Section
1.2)—adds further support to the hypothesis that abduction is a
reliable rule of inference, in the way in which every newly observed
black raven adds some support to the hypothesis that all ravens are
black. Because it does not involve abductive reasoning, this type of
argument is more likely to also appeal to disbelievers in abduction.
See Harré 1986, 1988, Bird 1998 (160), Kitcher 2001, and Douven
2002 for suggestions along these lines.
4. Abduction versus Bayesian Confirmation Theory

In the past decade, Bayesian confirmation theory has firmly
established itself as the dominant view on confirmation; currently one
cannot very well discuss a confirmation-theoretic issue without making
clear whether, and if so why, one’s position on that issue
deviates from standard Bayesian thinking. Abduction, in whichever
version, assigns a confirmation-theoretic role to explanation:
explanatory considerations contribute to making some hypotheses more
credible, and others less so. By contrast, Bayesian confirmation
theory makes no reference at all to the concept of explanation. Does
this imply that abduction is at loggerheads with the prevailing
doctrine in confirmation theory? Several authors have recently argued
that not only is abduction compatible with Bayesianism, it is a
much-needed supplement to it. The so far fullest defense of this view
has been given by Lipton (2004, Ch. 7); as he puts it, Bayesians
should also be “explanationists” (his name for the
advocates of abduction). (For other defenses, see Okasha 2000, McGrew
2003, Weisberg 2009, and Poston 2014, Ch. 7; for discussion, see Roche
and Sober 2013, 2014, and McCain and Poston 2014.)

This requires some clarification. For what could it mean for a
Bayesian to be an explanationist? In order to apply Bayes’ rule
and determine the probability for H after learning E,
the Bayesian agent will have to determine the probability of H
conditional on E. For that, he needs to assign unconditional
probabilities to H and E as well as a probability to
E given H; the former two are mostly called “prior
probabilities” (or just “priors”) of, respectively,
H and E, the latter the “likelihood” of
H on E. (This is the official Bayesian story. Not all of
those who sympathize with Bayesianism adhere to that story. For
instance, according to some it is more reasonable to think that
conditional probabilities are basic and that we derive unconditional
probabilities from them; see Hájek 2003, and references
therein.) How is the Bayesian to determine these values? As is well
known, probability theory gives us more probabilities once we have
some; it does not give us probabilities from scratch. Of course, when
H implies E or the negation of E, or when
H is a statistical hypothesis that bestows a certain chance on
E, then the likelihood follows “analytically.”
(This claim assumes some version of Lewis’ (1980) Principal
Principle, and it is controversial whether or not this principle is
analytic; hence the scare quotes.) But this is not always the case,
and even if it were, there would still be the question of how to
determine the priors. This is where, according to Lipton, abduction
comes in. In his proposal, Bayesians ought to determine their prior
probabilities and, if applicable, likelihoods on the basis of
explanatory considerations.

Exactly how are explanatory considerations to guide one’s choice
of priors? The answer to this question is not as simple as one might
at first think. Suppose you are considering what priors to assign to a
collection of rival hypotheses and you wish to follow Lipton’s
suggestion. How are you to do this? An obvious—though still
somewhat vague—answer may seem to go like this: Whatever exact
priors you are going to assign, you should assign a higher one to the
hypothesis that explains the available data best than to any of its
rivals (provided there is a best explanation). Note, though, that your
neighbor, who is a Bayesian but thinks confirmation has nothing to do
with explanation, may well assign a prior to the best explanation that
is even higher than the one you assign to that hypothesis. In fact,
his priors for best explanations may even be consistently higher than
yours, not because in his view explanation is somehow related to
confirmation—it is not, he thinks—but, well, just because.
In this context, “just because” is a perfectly legitimate
reason, because any reason for fixing one’s priors counts as
legitimate by Bayesian standards. According to mainstream Bayesian
epistemology, priors (and sometimes likelihoods) are up for grabs,
meaning that one assignment of priors is as good as another, provided
both are coherent (that is, they obey the axioms of probability
theory). Lipton’s recommendation to the Bayesian to be an
explanationist is meant to be entirely general. But what should your
neighbor do differently if he wants to follow the recommendation?
Should he give the same prior to any best explanation that you, his
explanationist neighbor, give to it, that is, lower his
priors for best explanations? Or rather should he give even
higher priors to best explanations than those he already
gives?

Perhaps Lipton’s proposal is not intended to address those who
already assign highest priors to best explanations, even if they do so
on grounds that have nothing to do with explanation. The idea might be
that, as long as one does assign highest priors to those hypotheses,
everything is fine, or at least finer than if one does not do so,
regardless of one’s reasons for assigning those priors. The
answer to the question of how explanatory considerations are to guide
one’s choice of priors would then presumably be that one ought
to assign a higher prior to the best explanation than to its rivals,
if this is not what one already does. If it is, one should just keep
doing what one is doing.

(As an aside, it should be noticed that, according to standard
Bayesian usage, the term “priors” does not necessarily
refer to the degrees of belief a person assigns before the receipt of
any data. If there are already data in, then, clearly, one
may assign higher priors to hypotheses that best explain the
then-available data. However, one can sensibly speak of “best
explanations” even before any data are known. For example, one
hypothesis may be judged to be a better explanation than any of its
rivals because the former requires less complicated mathematics, or
because it is stated in terms of familiar concepts only, which is not
true of the others. More generally, such judgments may be based on
what Kosso (1992, 30) calls internal features of hypotheses
or theories, that is, features that “can be evaluated without
having to observe the world.”)

A more interesting answer to the above question of how explanation is
to guide one’s choice of priors has been given by Jonathan
Weisberg (2009). We said that mainstream Bayesians regard one
assignment of prior probabilities as being as good as any other.
So-called objective Bayesians do not do so, however. These Bayesians
think priors must obey principles beyond the probability axioms in
order to be admissible. Objective Bayesians are divided among
themselves over exactly which further principles are to be obeyed, but
at least for a while they agreed that the Principle of Indifference is
among them. Roughly stated, this principle counsels that, absent a
reason to the contrary, we give equal priors to competing hypotheses.
As is well known, however, in its original form the Principle of
Indifference may lead to inconsistent assignments of probabilities and
so can hardly be advertised as a principle of rationality. The problem
is that there are typically various ways to partition logical space
that appear plausible given the problem at hand, and that not all of
them lead to the same prior probability assignment, even assuming the
Principle of Indifference. Weisberg’s proposal amounts to the
claim that explanatory considerations may favor some of those
partitions over others. Perhaps we will not always end up with a
unique partition to which the Principle of Indifference is to be
applied, but it would already be progress if we ended up with only a
handful of partitions. For we could then still arrive in a motivated
way at our prior probabilities, by proceeding in two steps, namely, by
first applying the Principle of Indifference to the partitions
separately, thereby possibly obtaining different assignments of
priors, and by then taking a weighted average of the thus obtained
priors, where the weights, too, are to depend on explanatory
considerations. The result would again be a probability
function—the uniquely correct prior probability function,
according to Weisberg.

The proposal is intriguing as far as it goes but, as Weisberg admits,
in its current form, it does not go very far. For one thing, it is
unclear how exactly explanatory considerations are to determine the
weights required for the second step of the proposal. For another, it
may be idle to hope that taking explanatory considerations into
account will in general leave us with a manageable set of partitions,
or that, even if it does, this will not be due merely to the fact that
we are overlooking a great many prima facie plausible ways of
partitioning logical space to begin with. (The latter point echoes the
argument of the bad lot, of course.)

Another suggestion about the connection between abduction and Bayesian
reasoning—to be found in Okasha 2000, McGrew 2003, Lipton 2004
(Ch. 7), and Dellsén 2018—is that the explanatory
considerations may serve as a heuristic to determine, even if only
roughly, priors and likelihoods in cases in which we would otherwise
be clueless and could do no better than guessing. This suggestion is
sensitive to the well-recognized fact that we are not always able to
assign a prior to every hypothesis of interest, or to say how probable
a given piece of evidence is conditional on a given hypothesis.
Consideration of that hypothesis’ explanatory power might then
help us to figure out, if perhaps only within certain bounds, what
prior to assign to it, or what likelihood to assign to it on the given
evidence.

Bayesians, especially the more modest ones, might want to retort that
the Bayesian procedure is to be followed if, and only if, either (a)
priors and likelihoods can be determined with some precision and
objectivity, or (b) likelihoods can be determined with some precision
and priors can be expected to “wash out” as more and more
evidence accumulates, or (c) priors and likelihoods can both be
expected to wash out. In the remaining cases—they might
say—we should simply refrain from applying Bayesian reasoning. A
fortiori, then, there is no need for an abduction-enhanced Bayesianism
in these cases. And some incontrovertible mathematical results
indicate that, in the cases that fall under (a), (b), or (c), our
probabilities will converge to the truth anyhow. Consequently, in
those cases there is no need for the kind of abductive heuristics that
the above-mentioned authors suggest, either. (Weisberg 2009, Sect.
3.2, raises similar concerns.)

Psillos (2000) proposes yet another way in which abduction might
supplement Bayesian confirmation theory, one that is very much in the
spirit of Peirce’s conception of abduction. The idea is that
abduction may assist us in selecting plausible candidates for testing,
where the actual testing then is to follow Bayesian lines. However,
Psillos concedes (2004) that this proposal assigns a role to abduction
that will strike committed explanationists as being too limited.

Finally, a possibility that has so far not been considered in the
literature is that abduction and Bayesianism do not so much work in
tandem—as they do on the above proposals—as operate in
different modes of reasoning; the Bayesian and the explanationist are
characters that feature in different plays, so to speak. It is widely
accepted that sometimes we speak and think about our beliefs in a
categorical manner, while at other times we speak and think about them
in a graded way. It is far from clear how these different ways of
speaking and thinking about beliefs—the epistemology of belief
and the epistemology of degrees of belief, to use Richard
Foley’s (1992) terminology—are related to one another. In
fact, it is an open question whether there is any straightforward
connection between the two, or even whether there is a connection at
all. Be that as it may, given that the distinction is undeniable, it
is a plausible suggestion that, just as there are different ways of
talking and thinking about beliefs, there are different ways of
talking and thinking about the revision of beliefs. In
particular, abduction could well have its home in the epistemology of
belief, and be called upon whenever we reason about our beliefs in a
categorical mode, while at the same time Bayes’ rule could have
its home in the epistemology of degrees of belief. Hard-nosed
Bayesians may insist that whatever reasoning goes on in the
categorical mode must eventually be justifiable in Bayesian terms, but
this presupposes the existence of bridge principles connecting the
epistemology of belief with the epistemology of degrees of
belief—and, as mentioned, whether such principles exist is
presently unclear.


====================================================================================================
TITLE: Peter Abelard
====================================================================================================
TOC:



1. Life and Works

1.1 Life
1.2 Works

2. Metaphysics
3. Logic
4. Philosophy of Language
5. Philosophy of Mind
6. Ethics
7. Theology
Bibliography

Primary texts in Latin
Primary texts in English translation
Selected Secondary Literature in English

Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries





TEXT:

1. Life and Works
1.1 Life

Abelard’s life is relatively well-known. In addition to events
chronicled in the public record, his inner life is revealed in his
autobiographical letter Historia calamitatum [“The
Story of My Troubles”] and in his famous correspondence with
Héloïse.

Abelard was born into the lesser nobility around 1079 in Le Pallet, a
small town in Brittany near Nantes. He received early training in
letters, and took to his studies with enthusiasm; his later writings
show familiarity with Cicero, Horace, Juvenal, Ovid, Lucan, Seneca,
and Vergil. Abelard eventually renounced his inheritance, including
its attendant knighthood, to pursue philosophy. He did so by
travelling to study with well-known philosophers, most notably
Roscelin and William of Champeaux.

During the first years of the twelfth century, Abelard felt confident
enough to set himself up as a lecturer, first at Melun and then at
Corbeil, competing mainly with William of Champeaux (Paris) for
students and reputation. The strain proved too
much—Abelard’s health failed, and he returned to Brittany
for several years.

Abelard returned to Paris sometime between 1108 and 1113 with his
health restored and his ambition intact. He attended William of
Champeaux’s lectures, and entered into debate with William over
the problem of universals. According to Abelard’s report, he
bested his teacher in debate, and gained his reputation as a
dialectician of note, teaching at several schools. Around 1113 Abelard
decided to study theology; he sought out the most eminent teacher of
theology of his day, Anselm of Laon (not to be confused with Anselm of
Canterbury), and became his student. It was not a good choice:
Anselm’s traditional methods did not appeal to Abelard, and,
after some back-and-forth, Abelard returned to Paris to continue on
his own. It would be the last time he studied with anyone.

Upon returning to Paris, Abelard became scholar-in-residence at Notre
Dame, a position he held until his romantic entanglement with
Héloïse led to his castration, at which point he entered
the Benedictine monastery of Saint Denis and Héloïse
entered the convent of Argenteuil. After his recovery, Abelard resumed
teaching at a nearby priory, primarily on theology and in particular
on the Trinity. His method of philosophical analysis was seen as a
direct challenge to more traditional approaches, and a synod, convened
in Soissons to examine Abelard’s writings, condemned them and
required Abelard to make a public avowal of faith, an experience he
found humiliating; shortly afterwards he was allowed to settle in a
wild and uninhabited section of land, to devote himself to
contemplation.

It was not to be. Abelard says that poverty forced him to resume
teaching. He and the students who flocked to him in droves constructed
an oratory named the Paraclete, where he continued to write, teach,
and research. This idyll came to an end around 1126, when Abelard
accepted an invitation to become abbot of the monastery of Saint
Gildas de Rhuys in Brittany; shortly afterwards he handed over the
Paraclete to Héloïse and the other nuns, whose convent had
been expropriated. Abelard found the monks of Saint Gildas difficult
and obstructive—even dangerous—and he claims that there
were several attempts on his life while in residence. During this
period he wrote the Historia calamitatum and corresponded
with Héloïse.

By the mid-1130s Abelard was given permission to return to Paris
(retaining his rank as abbot) and to teach in the schools on the Mont
Ste.-Genevieve. It was during this time that his theological treatises
were brought to the attention of Bernard of Clairvaux, who objected to
some of Abelard’s conclusions as well as to his approach to
matters of faith. After some inconclusive attempts to resolve their
differences, Abelard asked the archbishop of Sens to arrange a public
dispute between himself and Bernard on 3 June 1140, to settle their
disagreements. Bernard initially refused the invitation on the grounds
that one should not debate matters of faith, but then accepted it and,
unknown to Abelard, arranged to convene another commission of enquiry
to review Abelard’s works on suspicion of heresy. When Abelard
discovered that there was no debate but instead a kangaroo court, he
refused to take part, announcing his intention to appeal to the Pope
directly. He walked out of the proceedings and began travelling to
Rome. The Council condemned nineteen propositions it claimed to find
in his works and adjourned. Bernard launched a successful campaign
petitioning the Papal Court before Abelard was out of France; a letter
from the Pope upholding the decision of the Council of Soissons
reached Abelard while he was at Cluny; Abelard was ordered to silence.
By all accounts Abelard complied immediately, even meeting peacefully
with Bernard in reconciliation. Peter the Venerable, the abbot of
Cluny, wrote to the Pope about these matters, and the Pope lifted
Abelard’s sentence. Abelard remained under the protection of
Peter the Venerable first at Cluny, then at St. Marcel, as his health
gradually deteriorated. Abelard died on 21 April 1142. His body was
interred at the Paraclete, and today is (with Héloïse) in
Père Lachaise cemetery in Paris.

Abelard’s students were active as kings, philosophers, poets,
politicians, theologians, and monks; they include three popes and
several heads of state. Explicit references to Abelard’s
thinking in the later Middle Ages are few, likely because of the cloud
cast by the verdict of the Council of Soissons, but it is clear that
he had a seminal influence on twelfth-century philosophy and perhaps
on later fourteenth-century speculation as well.
1.2 Works

The dates of composition and even the number of Abelard’s
writings remain largely obscure and a matter of controversy among
scholars. One reason for this is that Abelard constantly revised and
rewrote, so that several distinct versions of a given work might be in
circulation; another reason is that several of his writings might
represent ‘teaching notes’ constantly evolving in courses
and seminars. Hence it is not clear that ‘date of
composition’ is a well-defined notion when applied to the body
of Abelard’s work that we now possess. Apart from
Abelard’s correspondence, which can be dated with relative
precision, Abelard’s extant work falls into three
categories.

The first category consists of Abelard’s works on
dialectic—works concerned with logic, philosophy of
language, metaphysics, and philosophy of mind. His two masterworks
are:

Logica ‘ingredientibus’,
“Logic” (starting with the words ‘To those
beginning…’).
Dialectica, “Dialectic.”


Both of these works follow the pattern of the logica vetus,
the “old logic” inherited from antiquity: Porphyry’s
introduction to Aristotle, the Isagoge; Aristotle’s
Categories and On Interpretation; Boethius’s
Introduction to the Categorical Syllogism, Categorical
Syllogisms, Hypothetical Syllogisms, On Topical
Difference, and On Division. Abelard’s works cover
the material presented in the old logic, though they do so in
different ways. His Logica
‘ingredientibus’ is a close textual commentary on
the old logic, though only some of it survives, namely the
commentaries on the Isagoge, the Categories, On
Interpretation, and On Topical Differences; his
Dialectica is an independent treatise on dialectic that
treats the same material thematically, though neither the beginning
(covering the Isagoge and the start of the
Categories) nor the ending (on division and definition) have
been preserved. In addition, there are four lesser works on
dialectic:

Introductiones parvulorum, “Introductory
Logic.”
Logica ‘nostrorum petitioni
sociorum’, “Logic” (starting with the words
‘At the request of our friends…’).
Tractatus de intellectibus, “A Treatise on
Understandings.”
Sententiae secundum Magistrum Petrum, “Master
Peter’s Views.”


The first of these is a series of elementary commentaries on the old
logic (though again not completely preserved); their simple level has
led some scholars to think they must come from early in
Abelard’s career, others to deny that they are Abelard’s
work at all. Second, the Logica ‘nostrorum
petitioni sociorum’ is something of a work-in-progress: it
assumes knowledge of Abelard’s earlier Logica
‘ingredientibus’ and discusses advanced points
not dealt with there, but for long stretches it is also a
straightforward paraphrase of or commentary on Porphyry’s
Isagoge; it has textual parallels with some of
Abelard’s other works and shows some knowledge of theology. The
third work deals with concepts, or ‘understandings’, from
both the point of view of logic (roughly as providing the meanings of
terms) and from the point of view of the philosophy of mind (as
vehicles for mental content). The last work may be no more than a
report of some of Abelard’s lectures, and is concerned with
logical and metaphysical puzzles about wholes and parts.

The second category consists of Abelard’s works on ethics:

Ethica seu Scito teipsum, “Ethics, or, Know
Yourself.”
Collationes, “Conversations” a.k.a.
Dialogus inter Philosophum, Iudaeum, et Christianum,
“The Dialogue of a Philosopher with a Jew and a
Christian”.


The Ethics offers an analysis of moral worth and the degree
of praise or blame that should attach to agents and their actions; it
breaks off at the beginning of the second book. The
Conversations is a pair of debates (among characters who
appear to Abelard in a dream) over the nature of happiness and the
supreme good: the Philosopher, who claims to follow only natural
reason, first debates with the Jew, who follows the Old Law; the
Philosopher then debates the Christian, who defends Christian ethics
from a philosophical point of view. Abelard also wrote a slight work
of practical advice for his son:

Carmen ad Astralabium, “Poem for
Astralabe.”


Moral advice and edifying sentiments are found in this series of
distichs.

The third category consists of Abelard’s works of philosophical
theology. His three main works are devoted to a philosophical analysis
of the Trinity, the several versions representing successive stages of
his thought and his attempts at orthodoxy (each rewritten several
times):

Theologia ‘summi boni’.
“Theology” (that begins with the words ‘The highest
good…’).
Theologia christiana, “Christian
Theology.”
Theologia ‘scholarium’,
“Theology” (that begins with the words ‘In the
schools…’).


The first version of the Theology seems to have been the work
condemned at the Council of Soisssons, the last the work condemned at
the Council of Sens. In addition to these three works, in which
problems in philosophical theology are treated thematically, Abelard
also wrote several commentaries:

Expositio orationis dominicae, “Analysis of the
Lord’s Prayer.”
Expositio symboli Apostolorum, “Analysis of the
Apostle’s Creed.”
Expositio fidei in symbolum Athanasii, “Analysis of
Faith in the Athanasian Creed.”
Hexaëmeron, “Commentary on Genesis
1–2:25.”
Commentaria in Epistolam Pauli ad Romanos,
“Commentary on St. Paul’s Letter to the
Romans.”


The first three commentaries are brief, but Abelard’s
discussions of the first verses of Genesis and of
Paul’s letter are extensive and detailed (the latter also
relevant to Abelard’s ethical theory). Abelard also took up
questions about faith and reason in a short work:

Soliloquium, “Soliloquy.”


This brief inner dialogue, modelled on Augustine’s
Soliloquies, has “Peter” talking things over with
“Abelard.” Theological questions of a more practical
nature were raised by Héloïse in a series of questions she
asked on her behalf and on behalf of the nuns of the Paraclete:

Problemata Heloïssae cum Petri Abaelardi
solutionibus, “Héloïse’s Problem-List
(with Abelard’s Solutions).”


Practical issues are also addressed in Abelard’s sermons, hymns,
and lamentations (planctus). Finally, Abelard composed an
extremely influential theological work that contains no theoretical
speculation at all:

Sic et non, “For and Against.”


Abelard assembles a series of 158 questions, each of which is
furnished with patristic citations that imply a positive answer
(sic) to the question and other patristic citations implying
a negative answer (non). Abelard does not attempt to
harmonize these apparently inconsistent remarks, but in his preface he
lays down rules for proper hermeneutic investigation: look for
ambiguity, check the surrounding context, draw relevant distinctions,
and the like.

Abelard’s students and disciples also record many of his views,
though this material has yet to be explored carefully. There are
references in Abelard’s extant works to other works we do not
have: Grammatica, “Grammar”; Rhetorica,
“Rhetoric”; a commentary on Ezekiel written at
the beginning of his studies in theology; and others. It is possible
some of these works may yet be found.
2. Metaphysics

Abelard’s metaphysics is the first great example of nominalism
in the Western tradition. While his view that universals are mere
words (nomina) justifies the label, nominalism—or,
better, irrealism—is the hallmark of Abelard’s entire
metaphysics. He is an irrealist not only about universals, but also
about propositions, events, times other than the present, natural
kinds, relations, wholes, absolute space, hylomorphic composites, and
the like. Instead, Abelard holds that the concrete individual, in all
its richness and variety, is more than enough to populate the world.
Abelard preferred reductive, atomist, and material explanations
whenever possible; he devoted a great deal of effort to pouring cold
water on the metaphysical excesses of his predecessors and
contemporaries.

Abelard defends his thesis that universals are nothing but words by
arguing that ontological realism about universals is incoherent. More
exactly, he holds that there cannot be any real object in the world
satisfying Boethius’s criteria for the universal, namely
something present as a whole in many at once so as to constitute their
substance (i.e. to make the individual in which it is present what it
is). Hence, Abelard concludes, universality is not an ontological
feature of the world but a semantic feature of language.

Suppose universals were things in the world, so that one and the same
item is completely present in both Socrates and an ass at the same
time, making each to be wholly an animal. Abelard points out that then
the same thing, animal, will be simultaneously rational (due
to its role in constituting the species human being) and
irrational (due to its role in constituting the species ass).
But then contraries are simultaneously present in the same thing as a
whole, which is impossible.

To the rejoinder that rationality and irrationality are not actually
present in the same thing, Abelard offers a twofold reply. First, he
rejects the claim that they are present only potentially. Each species
is actually informed by a contrary, and the genus is actually present
in each as a whole; hence it is actually informed by one contrary in
one species and by the other in the other; since it is wholly one and
the same in each, it is therefore actually informed by contraries, and
the contradiction results. Second, Abelard undertakes to establish
that contraries will be present not merely in the genus but even in
the selfsame individual. For Socrates is (an) animal, and so is
Brunellus the Ass; but by transitivity—since each is wholly and
completely animal—Socrates is Brunellus, and hence both
rational and irrational. Put a different way, each is essentially an
animal, and furthermore essentially rational and essentially
irrational.

If we object to this last piece of reasoning, on the grounds that
individuals are unique in virtue of their non-essential features,
Abelard replies that this view “makes accidents prior to
substance.” That is, the objection claims that individual things
are individual in virtue of features that contingently characterize
them, which confuses things with their features.

Prospects are no better for realism if the universal is identified not
with a single thing but with a collection of things. Abelard points
out that collections are posterior to their parts, and, furthermore,
the collection is not shared among its parts in the way a universal is
said to be common to many. Nor does it help to try to identify the
universal with the individual in some fashion, for example in claiming
that Socrates qua human is taken as the universal human
being; Abelard argues that if the universal really is the
individual, then we are stuck with the consequence that either
individuals such as Socrates are common to many, or there are as many
universals as there are individuals, each of which is absurd.

Abelard concludes that universality is merely linguistic, not a
feature of the world. More precisely, Abelard holds that common nouns
(such as ‘animal’), verbs, and negative names (such as
‘not-Socrates’) are correctly predicable of many, and so
count as universals. These terms are semantically general, in that
their sense applies to more than one thing, but they do not thereby
name some general thing; instead, they distributively refer to each of
the individuals to which the term applies. For example, the term
‘animal’ has the sense living substance, which is
inherently general, and it refers to each individual animal since each
is a living substance—as Abelard puts it, since each has the
status of being a living substance. But this is to leave the domain of
metaphysics for semantics; see the discussion of Abelard‘s
philosophy of language in
 Section 4.

Abelard maintains that everything in the world apart from God and
angels is either form, matter, or a composite of form and matter. The
matter of something is that out of which it is made, whether it
persists in the finished product (as bricks in a house) or is absorbed
into it (as flour in bread). Ultimately, all material objects are
composed of the four elements earth, air, fire, and water, but they do
not retain their elemental forms in most combinations. In general, the
form of a material object just is the configuration of its material
parts: “We call the form strictly what comes from the
composition of the parts.” The form of a statue, for example, is
its shape, which is no more than the arrangement of its
matter—the curve of the nose, the size of the eyes, and so on.
Forms are therefore supervenient on matter, and have no
ontological standing independent of it. This is not to deny that forms
exist, but to provide a particular explanation of what it is for a
form to inhere in a given subject, namely for that subject to have its
matter configured in a certain way. For example, the inherence of
shape in the statue just is the way in which its bronze is arranged.
Hence material things are identical with what they are made
of—with one exception: human beings, whose forms are their
immaterial (and immortal) souls. Strictly speaking, since human souls
are capable of existence in separation form the body, they are not
forms after all, though they act as substantial forms as long as they
are joined to the body.

Material composites of form and matter, humans excepted, are integral
wholes made up of their discrete material parts as configured in a
given way. Abelard countenances many types of integral wholes:
collections, no matter how their members are selected; structured
composites, whether naturally unified (such as Socrates and his limbs)
or artificially unified (such as the walls, floor, and roof of a
house); continuous quantities that are homogeneous material
‘substances,’ namely stuffs, such as water or gold;
geometrical objects, such as lines, defined by the relative position
of their parts; temporal wholes, such as a day and the hours that make
it up. Most of these wholes are ontologically nothing beyond their
material parts. Whether structured composites have any independent
ontological standing depends on the status of their organizing
forms.

Abelard’s theory of substantial integral wholes is not a pure
mereology in the modern sense, since he holds that there are
privileged divisions: just as a genus is properly divided into not
just any species but its proximate species, so too the division of a
whole must be into its principal parts. Intuitively, some wholes have
a natural division that takes precedence over others; a sentence, for
example, is divided into words, syllables, and letters, in precisely
that order. According to Abelard, the principal parts of a whole are
those whose conjunction immediately results in the complete whole. His
intent seems to be that the nature of the composition (if any) that
defines the integral whole also spells out its principal parts. A
house consists of floor, walls, and roof put together in the right
way. It is an open question whether each principal part (such as the
wall) requires the existence of all of its subparts (every brick). The
principal parts of a collection, for example, are just each of the
members of the collection, whatever may be the case with any given
member’s subparts; the principal parts of an aggregation are the
members located in proximity to one another.

Individuals have natures, and in virtue of their natures they belong
to determinate natural kinds. But an individual’s nature is not
something really shared with or common to other individuals;
Abelard’s refutation of realism has shown that this is
impossible. Instead, Abelard takes a natural kind to be a well-defined
collection of things that have the same features, broadly speaking,
that make them what they are. Why a given thing has some features
rather than others is explained by how it got that way—the
natural processes that created it result in its having the features it
does, namely being the kind of thing it is; similar processes lead to
similar results. On this reading, it is clear that natural kinds have
no special status; they are no more than discrete integral wholes
whose principle of membership is similarity, merely reflecting the
fact that the world is divided into discrete similarity-classes of
objects. Furthermore, such real relations of similarity are nothing
themselves above and beyond the things that are similar. The division
into natural kinds is, presumably, a ‘shallow fact’ about
the world: matters could have been otherwise had God ordained them
differently; fire might be cold, heavy bodies fall upwards, frogs
reason. If these causal powers were different, then natural kinds
might be different as well, or might not have been as sharply
differentiated as they are now. Given how matters stand, natural kinds
carve the world at its joints, but they are the joints chosen by
God.
3. Logic

Abelard was the greatest logician since Antiquity: he devised a purely
truth-functional propositional logic, recognizing the distinction
between force and content we associate with Frege,
and worked out a complete theory of entailment as it functions in
argument (which we now take as the theory of logical consequence). His
logical system is flawed in its handling of topical inference, but
that should not prevent our recognition of Abelard’s
achievements.

Abelard observes that the same propositional content can be expressed
with different force in different contexts: the content that
Socrates is in the house is expressed in an assertion in
‘Socrates is in the house’; in a question in ‘Is
Socrates in the house?’; in a wish in ‘If only Socrates
were in the house!’ and so on. Hence Abelard can distinguish in
particular the assertive force of a sentence from its propositional
content, a distinction that allows him to point out that the component
sentences in a conditional statement are not asserted, though they
have the same content they do when asserted—‘If Socrates
is in the kitchen, then Socrates is in the house’ does not
assert that Socrates is in the kitchen or that he is in the house, nor
do the antecedent or the consequent, although the same form of words
could be used outside the scope of the conditional to make such
assertions. Likewise, the distinction allows Abelard to define
negation, and other propositional connectives, purely
truth-functionally in terms of content, so that negation, for
instance, is treated as follows: not-p is false/true if and
only if p is true/false.

The key to the theory of argument, for Abelard, is found in
inferentia, best rendered as ‘entailment’, since
Abelard requires the connection between the propositions involved to
be both necessary and relevant. That is, the conclusion—more
exactly, the sense of the final statement—is required by the
sense of the preceding statement(s), so that it cannot be otherwise.
Abelard often speaks of the sense of the final statement being
“contained” in the sense of the preceding statement(s),
much as we speak of the conclusion being contained in the premisses.
An entailment is complete (perfecta) when it holds in virtue
of the logical form (complexio) of the propositions involved.
By this, Abelard tells us, he means that the entailment holds under
any uniform substitution in its terms, the criterion now associated
with Bolzano. The traditional four figures and moods of the
categorical syllogism derived from Aristotle, and the doctrine of the
hypothetical syllogism derived from Boethius, are all instances of
complete entailments, or as we should say, valid inference.

There is another way in which conclusions can be necessary and
relevant to their premisses, yet not be formally valid (not
be a complete entailment). The necessary connection among the
propositions, and the link among their senses, might be a function of
non-formal metaphysical truths holding in all possible worlds. For
instance, human beings are a kind of animal, so the consequence
‘If Socrates is a human being, Socrates is an animal’
holds of necessity and the sense of the antecedent compels that of the
consequent, but it is not formally valid under uniform substitution.
Abelard takes such incomplete entailments to hold according to the
theory of the topics (to be forms of so-called topical inference). The
sample inference above is validated by the topic “from the
species”, a set of metaphysical relations one of which is
expressible in the rule “Whatever the species is predicated of,
so too is the genus” which grounds the inferential force of the
entailment. Against Boethius, Abelard maintained that topical rules
were only needed for incomplete entailment, and in particular are not
required to validate the classical moods of the categorical and
hypothetical syllogism mentioned in the preceding paragraph.

Abelard spends a great deal of effort to explore the complexities of
the theory of topical inference, especially charting the precise
relations among conditional sentences, arguments, and what he calls
“argumentation” (roughly what follows from conceded
premisses). One of the surprising results of his investigation is that
he denies that a correlate of the Deduction Theorem holds, maintaining
that a valid argument need not correspond to an acceptable conditional
sentence, nor conversely, since the requirements on arguments and
conditionals differ.

In the end, it seems that Abelard’s principles of topical
inference do not work, a fact that became evident with regard to the
topic “from opposites”: Abelard’s principles lead to
inconsistent results, a result noted by Alberic of Paris. This led to
a crisis in the theory of inference in the twelfth century, since
Abelard unsuccessfully tried to evade the difficulty. These debates
seem to have taken place in the later part of the 1130s, as Abelard
was about to become embroiled with Bernard of Clairvaux, and his
attention was elsewhere.
4. Philosophy of Language

Much of Abelard’s philosophy of language is devoted to analyzing
how a given expression or class of expressions function logically:
what words are quantifiers, which imply negation, and the like, so
that the logic described above may be applied. To do so, he relies on
the traditional division, derived from Aristotle, that sees the main
linguistic categories as name, verb, and their
combination into the sentence.

Abelard takes names to be conventionally significant simple words,
usually without tense. So understood there are a wide variety of
names: proper and common names; adjectives and adverbs; pronouns,
whether personal, possessive, reflexive, or relative; conventional
interjections such as ‘Goodness!’; and, arguably,
conjunctions and prepositions (despite lacking definite
signification), along with participles and gerundives (which have
tense). Abelard usually, though not always, treats compound names such
as ‘street-sweeper’ reductively. Even so his list is not
general enough to catalogue all referring expressions. In point of
fact, much of Abelard’s discussion of the semantics of names
turns on a particular case that stands for the rest: common names.
These are at the heart of the problem of universals, and they pose
particular difficulties for semantics.

When Abelard puts forward his claim that universality is only a
linguistic phenomenon, so that universals are “nothing more than
words,” he raises the objection that unless common names are the
names of common items, they will be meaningless, and so his view is no
better than that of his teacher Roscelin (who held that universals
were mere mouth noises). In reply Abelard clearly draws a distinction
between two semantic properties names possess: reference
(nominatio), a matter of what the term applies to; and sense
(significatio), a matter of what hearing the term brings to
mind, or more exactly the informational content (doctrina) of
the concept the word is meant to give rise to, a causal notion. A few
remarks about each are in order.

Names, both proper and common, refer to things individually or
severally. A name is linked with that of which it is the name as
though there were someone who devised the name to label a given thing
or kind of thing, a process known as “imposition”
(modelled on Adam’s naming the animals in Genesis 2:19), rather
like baptism. This rational reconstruction of reference does not
require the person imposing the name, the “impositor”, to
have anything more than an indefinite intention to pick out the thing
or kind of thing, whatever its nature may be:

The inventor [of names] intended to impose them according to some
natures or distinctive properties of things, even if he himself did
not know how to think correctly upon the nature or distinctive
property of a thing.


A name “has a definition in the nature of its imposition, even
if we do not know what it is.” Put in modern terms, Abelard
holds a theory of direct reference, in which the extension of
a term is not a function of its sense. We are often completely
ignorant of the proper conceptual content that should be associated
with a term that has been successfully imposed.

A proper name—the name of a primary substance—signifies a
concrete individual (hoc aliquid), picking out its bearer as
personally distinct from all else. Therefore, proper names are
semantically singular referring expressions, closely allied to
indexicals, demonstratives, and singular descriptions (or descriptive
terms). Common names, by contrast, are semantically allied with
expressions that have what Abelard calls “plural
signification”. On the one hand, common names are like plural
nouns; the common name ‘man’ is grammatically singular but
operates like the plural term ‘men’—each refers to
every man, although the plural term signifies individuals as part of a
collection, whereas the common name distributively refers to each
individual. On the other hand, common names are like terms such as
‘trio’ or ‘pair’ in that they pick out a
determinate plurality of individuals, but only on an occasion of use,
since their extension is variable.

Thus a common name distributively refers to concrete individuals,
though not to them qua individuals. Instead, it severally
picks out those individuals having a given nature: ‘human
being’ refers to Socrates and to Plato, in virtue of each of
them being human. This is not a shared feature of any sort; Socrates
just is what he is, namely human, and likewise Plato is what he is,
namely human too. Abelard states his deflationary position clearly in
his Logica ‘ingredientibus’:

Now it seems we should stay away from accepting the agreement among
things according to what is not any thing—it’s as though
we were to unite in nothing things that now exist!—namely, when
we say that this [human] and that one agree in the human status, that
is to say: in that they are human. But we mean precisely that they are
human and don’t differ in this regard—let me repeat: [they
don’t differ] in that they are human, although we’re not
appealing to any thing [in this explanation].


Socrates and Plato are real; their agreement is real, too, but it
isn’t to be explained by appealing to any thing—their
agreement just is their each being human. From a metaphysical point of
view they have the same standing as human beings; this does not
involve any metaphysically common shared ingredient, or indeed appeal
to any ingredient at all. That is the sense in which there is a
“common reason” for the imposition of a common name. 

For all that signification is posterior to reference, names do have
signification as well. Abelard holds that the signification of a term
is the informational content of the concept that is associated with
the term upon hearing it, in the normal course of events. Since names
are only conventionally significant, which concept is associated with
a given name depends in part on the psychological conditioning of
language-users, in virtue of which Abelard can treat signification as
both a causal and a normative notion: the word ‘rabbit’
ought to cause native speakers of English to have the concept of a
rabbit upon hearing it. Abelard is careful to insist that the
signification is a matter of the informational content carried in the
concept—mere psychological associations, even the mental images
characteristic of a given concept, are not part of what the word
means. Ideally, the concept will correspond to a real
definition that latches onto the nature of the thing, the way
‘rational mortal animal’ is thought to be the real
definition of ‘human being’, regardless of other
associated features (even necessary features such as risibility) or
fortuitous images (as any mental image of a human will be of someone
with determinate features). Achieving such clarity in our concepts is,
of course, an arduous business, and requires an understanding of how
understanding itself works (see the discussion of Abelard’s
philosophy of mind in
 Section 5).
 Yet one point should be clear from the example. The significations of
some names, such as those corresponding to natural-kind terms, are
abstractions in the sense that they include only certain features of
the things to which the term refers. They do not positively exclude
all other features, though, and are capable of further determinate
specification: ‘rational mortal animal’ as the content of
the concept of ‘human being’ signifies all humans,
whatever their further features may be—tall or short, fat or
thin, male or female, and so on.

What holds for the semantics of names applies for the most part to
verbs. The feature that sets verbs apart from names, more so than
tense or grammatical person, is that verbs have connective force
(vis copulativa). This is a primitive and irreducible feature
of verbs that can only be discharged when they are joined with names
in the syntactically appropriate way, reminiscent of the
‘unsaturatedness’ of concepts in Frege. Sentences are made
up of names and verbs in such a way that the meaning of the whole
sentence is a function of the meaning of its parts. That is,
Abelardian semantics is fundamentally compositional in nature. The
details of how the composition works are complex. Abelard works
directly with a natural language (Latin) that, for all its
artificiality, is still a native second tongue. Hence there are many
linguistic phenomena Abelard is compelled to analyze that would be
simply disallowed in a more formal framework.

For example, Abelard notes that most verbs can occur as predicates in
two ways, namely as a finite verbal form or as a nominal form combined
with an auxiliary copula, so that we may say either ‘Socrates
runs’ or ‘Socrates is running’; the same holds for
transitive predication, for instance ‘Socrates hits Plato’
and ‘Socrates is hitting Plato.’ Abelard argues that in
general the pure verbal version of predication is the fundamental
form, which explains and clarifies the extended version; the latter is
only strictly necessary where simple verbal forms are lacking. (The
substantive verb ‘is’ requires special treatment.) Hence
for Abelard the basic analysis of a predicative statement recognizes
that two fundamentally different linguistic categories are joined
together: the name n and the simple verbal function
V( ), combined in the well-formed sentence
V(n).

Abelard argues that sentences (propositiones) must signify
more than just the understandings of the constituent name and verb.
First, a sentence such as ‘Socrates runs’ deals with
Socrates and with running, not with anyone’s understandings. We
talk about the world, not merely someone’s understanding of the
world. Second, sentences like ‘If something is human, it is an
animal’ are false if taken to be about understandings, for
someone could entertain the concept human without
entertaining the concept animal, and so the antecedent would
obtain without the consequent. Third, understandings are evanescent
particulars, mere mental tokenings of concepts. But at least some
consequential sentences are necessary, and necessity can’t be
grounded on things that are transitory, and so not on understandings.
Sentences must therefore signify something else in addition to
understandings, something that can do what mere understandings cannot.
Abelard describes this as signifying what the sentence says, calling
what is said by the sentence its dictum (plural
dicta).

To the modern philosophical ear, Abelard’s dicta might
sound like propositions, abstract entities that are the timeless
bearers of truth and falsity. But Abelard will have nothing to do with
any such entities. He declares repeatedly and emphatically that
despite being more than and different from the sentences that express
them, dicta have no ontological standing whatsoever. In the
short space of a single paragraph he says that they are “no real
things at all” and twice calls them “absolutely
nothing.” They underwrite sentences, but they aren’t real
things. For although a sentence says something, there is not some
thing that it says. The semantic job of sentences is to say
something, which is not to be confused with naming or denoting some
thing. It is instead a matter of proposing how things are, provided
this is not given a realist reading. Likewise, the truth of true
sentences is not a property inhering in some timeless entity, but no
more than the assertion of what the sentence says—that is,
Abelard adopts a deflationary account of truth. A sentence is true if
things stand in the way it says, and things make sentences true or
false in virtue of the way they are (as well as in virtue of what the
sentences say), and nothing further is required. The sentence
‘Socrates runs’ is true because Socrates runs, which is
all that can be said or needs to be said.
5. Philosophy of Mind

Aristotelian philosophy of mind offers two analyses of intentionality:
the conformality theory holds that we think of an object by having its
very form in the mind, the resemblance theory that we do so by having
a mental image in the mind that naturally resembles the object.
Abelard rejects each of these theories and proposes instead an
adverbial theory of thought, showing that neither mental images nor
mental contents need be countenanced as ontologically independent of
the mind. He gives a contextual explication of intentionality that
relies on a linguistic account of mental representation, adopting a
principle of compositionality for understandings.

The first Aristotelian analysis takes understanding to be the
mind’s acquisition of the form of the object that is understood,
without its matter. For an understanding to be about some
thing—say, a cat—is for the form of the cat to be in the
mind or intellective soul. The inherence of the form in matter makes
the matter to be a thing of a certain kind, so that the inherence of
the form cat in matter produces an actual cat, whereas the
(immaterial) inherence of the form cat in the mind transforms
the mind into an understanding of a cat: the mind becomes (formally)
identical with its object. Since the ‘aboutness’ of
understanding is analyzed as the commonness or identity of form in the
understanding and the thing understood, we may call this approach the
conformality theory of understanding. This theory captures
the intuition that understanding somehow inherits or includes
properties of what is understood, by reducing the intentionality of
understanding to the objective identity of the form in the mind and
the form in the world.

The second Aristotelian analysis takes understanding to be the
mind’s possession of a concept that is a natural likeness of, or
naturally similar to, that of which it is a concept. For an
understanding to be about some thing, such as a cat, is for there to
be an occurrent concept in the mind that is a natural likeness of a
cat. The motivation for calling the likeness “natural” is
to guarantee that the resemblance between the understanding and what
is understood is objective, and that all persons have access to the
same stock of concepts. (The conformality theory does this by
postulating the objective existence of forms in things and by an
identical process in all persons of assimilating or acquiring forms.)
We may call this approach the resemblance theory of
understanding: mental acts are classified according to the distinct
degree and kind of resemblance they have to the things that are
understood.

The resemblance theory faces well-known problems in spelling out the
content of resemblance or likeness. For example, a concept is clearly
immaterial, and as such radically differs from any material object.
Furthermore, there seems to be no formal characteristic of a mental
act in virtue of which it can non-trivially be said to resemble
anything else. To get around these difficulties, mediaeval
philosophers, like the British Empiricists centuries later, appealed
to a particular kind of resemblance, namely pictorial resemblance. A
portrait of Socrates is about Socrates in virtue of visually
resembling Socrates in the right ways. And just as there are pictorial
images that are about their subjects, so too are there mental images
that are about things. These mental images, whether they are concepts
or are contained in concepts, explain the way in which a concept is
‘about’ an object. For an understanding to be about a cat
is for it to be or contain a mental image of a cat. The phenomenon of
mental ‘aboutness’ is explicated by the more familiar case
of pictorial aboutness, itself reduced to a real relation of
resemblance.

Despite their common Aristotelian heritage, the conformality theory
and the resemblance theory are not equivalent. The transformation of
the mind through the inherence of a form is not necessarily the same
as the mind’s possession of a concept. Equally, natural likeness
or resemblance need not be understood as identity of form; formal
identity need not entail genuine resemblance, due to the different
subjects in which the form is embodied.

The standard way to reconcile the conformality theory and the
resemblance theory is to take the mind’s possession of a concept
to be its ability to transform itself through the inherence of a form,
construing formal identity as natural likeness, where having a form in
the mind that is identical to the form of the object understood just
is to have a mental image of that very object.

Abelard argues against conformality as follows. Consider a tower,
which is a material object with a certain length, depth, and height;
assume that these features compose its form, much as the shape of a
statue is its form. According to Aristotelian metaphysics, the
inherence of a form in a subject makes the subject into something
characterized by that form, as for instance whiteness inhering in
Socrates makes him something white. The forms of the tower likewise
make that in which they inhere to be tall, wide, massive—all
physical properties. If these forms inhere in the mind, then, they
should make the mind tall, wide, and massive, an absurd conclusion:
the mind “cannot extend itself in length or width.” Yet it
is a cardinal thesis of the conformality theory that the mind has the
identical form that is possessed by the external object, the tower,
although the form of (say) length is by its very nature physical.
Thus, Abelard concludes, conformality is incoherent.

Abelard’s main objection to the resemblance theory is that
mental images qua images, like any sign, are inert: they
require interpretation. A sign is just an object. It may be taken in a
significative role, though it need not be. Abelard notes that this
distinction holds equally for non-mental signs: we can treat a statue
as a lump of bronze or as a likeness. Mental images are likewise
inert. For a sign to function significatively, then, something more is
required beyond its mere presence or existence. But the resemblance
theory doesn’t recognize the need to interpret the mental image
as an image, and thereby mistakenly identifies understanding with the
mere presence of a mental image in the mind. Abelard concludes that
mental images have only an instrumental role in thought, describing
them as “intermediary signs of things” (intersigna
rerum). Intentionality derives instead from the act of attention
(attentio) directed upon the mental image. Proof is found in
the fact that that we can “vary the understanding” simply
by attending to different features of the mental image: the selfsame
image—say, a fig tree—can be used to think about this very
fig tree, or trees in general, or plant life, or my lost love with
whom I sat under it, or anything whatsoever. There is no intrinsic
feature of the mental image in virtue of which it is about any given
thing; if there were, Abelard notes, we could determine by inspection
what a sign is about—but we can’t. Mental images,
therefore, can’t explain the intentionality of understanding,
because their role is merely instrumental. We think with them, and
cannot avoid them; but they do not explain intentionality.

Abelard draws the conclusion that intentionality is a primitive and
irreducible feature of the mind, our acts of attending to things.
Different acts of attention are intrinsically different from one
another; they are about what they are about in virtue of being the
kind of attention they are. Hence Abelard adopts what is nowadays
called an adverbial theory of thought.

Given that intentionality is primitive, Abelard adopts a contextual
approach to mental content: he embeds these irreducible acts of
attention in a structure whose articulation helps define the character
of its constituent elements. The structure Abelard offers is
linguistic, a logic of mental acts: just as words can be said to
express thoughts, so too we can use the articulated logic of language
to give a theory of understanding. In short, Abelard gives something
very like a linguistic account of mental representation or
intentionality. To this end he embraces a principle of
compositionality, holding that what an understanding is about is a
function of what its constituent understandings are about. The unity
of the understanding of a complex is a function of its logical
simplicity, which is characterized by the presence of what Abelard
calls “a single dominant conjunction” (the logical
operator of greatest scope). Hence the understanding of a complex may
be treated as a complex of distinct understandings, aggregated in the
same thought, with its (logical) structure flowing from the
‘dominant conjunction’ over the other logical operations
governing its constituent understandings. Abelard’s acts of
attention thus display the logical structure of the understanding they
express, and thereby give the semantics of written or spoken language.
Much of Abelard’s writings on logic and dialectic are given over
to working out the details as a scheme for explicating mental
content.
6. Ethics

Abelard takes the rational core of traditional Christian morality to
be radically intentionalist, based on the following
principle: the agent’s intention alone determines the moral
worth of an action. His main argument against the moral relevance of
consequences turns on what contemporary philosophers often refer to as
moral luck. Suppose two men each have the money and the intention to
establish shelters for the poor, but one is robbed before he can act
whereas the second is able to carry out his intention. According to
Abelard, to think that there is a moral difference between them is to
hold that “the richer men were the better they could become
… this is the height of insanity!” Deed-centred morality
loses any kind of purchase on what might have been the case. Likewise,
it cannot offer any ground for taking the epistemic status of the
agent into account, although most people would admit that ignorance
can morally exculpate an agent. Abelard makes the point with the
following example: imagine the case of fraternal twins, brother and
sister, who are separated at birth and each kept in complete ignorance
of even the existence of the other; as adults they meet, fall in love,
are legally married and have sexual intercourse. Technically this is
incest, but Abelard finds no fault in either to lay blame.

Abelard concludes that in themselves deeds are morally indifferent.
The proper subject of moral evaluation is the agent, via his or her
intentions. It might be objected that the performance or
nonperformance of the deed could affect the agent’s feelings,
which in turn may affect his or her intentions, so that deeds thereby
have moral relevance (at least indirectly). Abelard denies it:

For example, if someone forces a monk to lie bound in chains between
two women, and by the softness of the bed and the touch of the women
beside him he is brought to pleasure (but not to consent), who may
presume to call this pleasure, which nature makes necessary, a fault?


We are so constructed that the feeling of pleasure is inevitable in
certain situations: sexual intercourse, eating delicious food, and the
like. If sexual pleasure in marriage is not sinful, then the pleasure
itself, inside or outside of marriage, is not sinful; if it is sinful,
then marriage cannot sanctify it—and if the conclusion were
drawn that such acts should be performed wholly without pleasure, then
Abelard declares they cannot be done at all, and it was unreasonable
(of God) to permit them only in a way in which they cannot be
performed.

On the positive side, Abelard argues that unless intentions are the
key ingredient in assessing moral value it is hard to see why
coercion, in which one is forced to do something against his or her
will, should exculpate the agent; likewise for ignorance—though
Abelard points out that the important moral notion is not simply
ignorance but strictly speaking negligence. Abelard takes an extreme
case to make his point. He argues that the crucifiers of Christ were
not evil in crucifying Jesus. (This example, and others like it, got
Abelard into trouble with the authorities, and it isn’t hard to
see why.) Their ignorance of Christ’s divine nature didn’t
by itself make them evil; neither did their acting on their (false and
mistaken) beliefs, in crucifying Christ. Their non-negligent ignorance
removes blame from their actions. Indeed, Abelard argues that they
would have sinned had they thought crucifying Christ was required and
did not crucify Christ: regardless of the facts of the case,
failing to abide by one’s conscience in moral action renders the
agent blameworthy.

There are two obvious objections to Abelard’s intentionalism.
First, how is it possible to commit evil voluntarily? Second, since
intentions are not accessible to anyone other than the agent,
doesn’t Abelard’s view entail that it is impossible to
make ethical judgements?

With regard to the first objection, Abelard has a twofold answer.
First, it is clear that we often want to perform the deed and at the
same time do not want to suffer the punishment. A man wants to have
sexual intercourse with a woman, but not to commit adultery; he would
prefer it if she were unmarried. Second, it is clear that we sometimes
“want what we by no means want to want”: our bodies react
with pleasure and desire independently of our wills. If we act on such
desires, then our action is done “of” will, as Abelard
calls it, though not voluntarily. There is nothing evil in desire:
there is only evil in acting on desire, and this is compatible with
having contrary desires.

With regard to the second objection, Abelard grants that other humans
cannot know the agent’s intentions—God, of course, does
have access to internal mental states, and so there can be a Final
Judgement. However, Abelard does not take ethical judgement to pose a
problem. God is the only one with a right to pass judgement. Yet this
fact doesn’t prevent us from enforcing canons of human justice,
because, Abelard holds, human justice has primarily an exemplary and
deterrent function. In fact, Abelard argues, it can even be just to
punish an agent we strongly believe had no evil intention. He cites
two cases. First, a woman accidentally smothers her baby while trying
to keep it warm at night, and is overcome with grief. Abelard
maintains that we should punish her for the beneficial example her
punishment may have on others: it may make other poor mothers more
careful not to accidentally smother their babies while trying to keep
them warm. Second, a judge may have excellent (but legally
impermissible) evidence that a witness is perjuring himself; since he
cannot show that the witness is lying, the judge is forced to rule on
the basis of the witness’s testimony that the accused, whom he
believes to be innocent, is guilty. Human justice may with propriety
ignore questions of intention. Since there is divine justice, ethical
notions are not an idle wheel—nor should they be, even on
Abelard’s understanding of human justice, since they are the
means by which we determine which intentions to promote or discourage
when we punish people as examples or in order to deter others.

There is a sense, then, in which the only certifiable sin is acting
against one’s conscience, unless one is morally negligent. Yet
if we cannot look to the intrinsic value of the deeds or their
consequences, how do we determine which acts are permissible or
obligatory? Unless conscience has a reliable guide, Abelard’s
position seems to open the floodgates to well-meaning
subjectivism.

Abelard solves the problem by taking obedience to God’s
will—the hallmark of morally correct behaviour, and itself an
instance of natural law—to be a matter of the agent’s
intention conforming to a purely formal criterion, namely the Golden
Rule (“Do to others as you would be done to”). This
criterion can be discovered by reason alone, without any special
revelation or religious belief, and is sufficient to ensure the
rightness of the agent’s intention. But the resolution of this
problem immediately leads to another problem. Even if we grant Abelard
his naturalistic ethics, why should an agent care if his or her
intentions conform to the Golden Rule? In short, even if Abelard were
right about morality, why be moral?

Abelard’s answer is that our happiness—to which no one is
indifferent—is linked to virtue, that is, to habitual morally
correct behaviour. Indeed, Abelard’s project in the
Collationes is to argue that reason can prove that a merely
naturalistic ethics is insufficient, and that an agent’s
happiness is necessarily bound up with accepting the principles of
traditional Christian belief, including the belief in God and an
Afterlife. In particular, he argues that the Afterlife is a condition
to which we ought to aspire, that it is a moral improvement even on
the life of virtue in this world, and that recognizing this is
constitutive of wanting to do what God wants, that is, to live
according to the Golden Rule, which guarantees as much as anything can
(pending divine grace) our long-term postmortem happiness.

The Philosopher first argues with the Jew, who espouses a
‘strict observance’ moral theory, namely obedience to the
Mosaic Law. One of the arguments the Jew offers is the Slave’s
Wager (apparently the earliest-known version of Pascal’s Wager).
Imagine that a Slave is told one morning by someone he doesn’t
know whether to trust that his powerful and irritable Master, who is
away for the day, has left instructions about what to do in his
absence. The Slave can follow the instructions or not. He reasons that
if the Master indeed left the instructions, then by following them he
will be rewarded and by not following them he will be severely
punished, whereas if the Master did not leave the instructions he
would not be punished for following them, though he might be lightly
punished for not following them. (This conforms to the standard payoff
matrix for Pascal’s Wager.) That is the position the Jew finds
himself in: God has apparently demanded unconditional obedience to the
Mosaic Law, the instructions left behind. The Philosopher argues that
the Jew may have other choices of action and, in any event, that there
are rational grounds for thinking that ethics is not a matter of
action in conformity to law but a matter of the agent’s
intentions, as we have seen above.

The Philosopher then argues with the Christian. He initially maintains
that virtue entails happiness, and hence there is no need of an
Afterlife since a virtuous person remains in the same condition
whether dead or alive. The Christian, however, reasons that the
Afterlife is better, since in addition to the benefits conferred by
living virtuously, the agent’s will is no longer impeded by
circumstances. In the Afterlife we are no longer subject to the body,
for instance, and hence are not bound by physical necessities such as
food, shelter, clothing, and the like. The agent can therefore be as
purely happy as life in accordance with virtue could permit, when no
external circumstances could affect the agent’s actions. The
Philosopher grants that the Afterlife so understood is a clear
improvement even on the virtuous life in this world, and joins with
the Christian in a cooperative endeavour to define the nature of the
virtues and the Supreme Good. Virtue is its own reward, and in the
Afterlife nothing prevents us from rewarding ourselves with virtue to
the fullest extent possible.
7. Theology

Abelard held that reasoning has a limited role to play in matters of
faith. That he gave reasoning a role at all brought him into conflict
with those we might now call anti-dialecticians, including
his fellow abbot Bernard of Clairvaux. That the role he gave it is
limited brought him into conflict with those he called
“pseudo-dialecticians,” including his former teacher
Roscelin.

Bernard of Clairvaux and other anti-dialecticians seem to have thought
that the meaning of a proposition of the faith, to the extent that it
can be grasped, is plain; beyond that plain meaning, there is nothing
we can grasp at all, in which case reason is clearly no help. That is,
the anti-dialecticians were semantic realists about the plain
meaning of religious sentences. Hence their impatience with Abelard,
who seemed not only bent on obfuscating the plain meaning of
propositions of the faith, which is bad enough, but to do so by
reasoning, which has no place either in grasping the plain meaning
(since the very plainness of plain meaning consists in its being
grasped immediately without reasoning) or in reaching some more
profound understanding (since only the plain meaning is open to us at
all).

Abelard has no patience for the semantic realism that underlies the
sophisticated anti-dialectical position. Rather than argue against it
explicitly, he tries to undermine it. From his commentaries on
scripture and dogma to his works of speculative theology, Abelard is
first and foremost concerned to show how religious claims can be
understood, and in particular how the application of dialectical
methods can clarify and illuminate propositions of the faith.
Furthermore, he rejects the claim that there is a plain meaning to be
grasped. Outlining his method in the Prologue to his Sic et
non, Abelard describes how he initially raises a question, e.g.
whether priests are required to be celibate, and then arranges
citations from scriptural and patristic authorities that at least seem
to answer the question directly into positive and negative responses.
(Abelard offers advice in the Prologue for resolving the apparent
contradictions among the authorities using a variety of techniques:
see whether the words are used in the same sense on both sides; draw
relevant distinctions to resolve the issue; look at the context of the
citation; make sure that an author is speaking in his own voice rather
than merely reporting or paraphrasing someone else’s position;
and so on.) Now each authority Abelard cites seems to speak clearly
and unambiguously either for a positive answer to a given question or
for a negative one. If ever there were cases of plain meaning, Abelard
seems to have found them in authorities, on opposing sides of
controversial issues. His advice in the Prologue amounts to saying
that sentences that seem to be perfect exemplars of plain meaning in
fact have to be carefully scrutinized to see just what their meaning
is. Yet that is just to say that they do not have plain meaning at
all; we have to use reason to uncover their meaning. Hence the
anti-dialecticians don’t have a case.

There is a far more serious threat to the proper use of reason in
religion, Abelard thinks (Theologia christiana 3.20):

Those who claim to be dialecticians are usually led more easily to
[heresy] the more they hold themselves to be well-equipped with
reasons, and, to that extent more secure, they presume to attack or
defend any position the more freely. Their arrogance is so great that
they think there isn’t anything that can’t be understood
and explained by their petty little lines of reasoning. Holding all
authorities in contempt, they glory in believing only
themselves—for those who accept only what their reason persuades
them of, surely answer to themselves alone, as if they had eyes that
were unacquainted with darkness.


Such pseudo-dialecticians take reason to be the final arbiter of all
claims, including claims about matters of faith. More exactly, Abelard
charges them with holding that (a) everything can be explained by
human reason; (b) we should only accept what reason persuades us of;
(c) appeals to authority have no rational persuasive force. Real
dialecticians, he maintains, reject (a)–(c), recognizing that
human reason has limits, and that some important truths may lie
outside those limits but not beyond belief; which claims about matters
of faith we should accept depends on both the epistemic reliability of
their sources (the authorities) and their consonance with reason to
the extent they can be investigated.

Abelard’s arguments for rejecting (a)–(c) are
sophisticated and subtle. For the claim that reason may be fruitfully
applied to a particular article of faith, Abelard offers a particular
case study in his own writings. The bulk of Abelard’s work on
theology is devoted to his dialectical investigation of the Trinity.
He elaborates an original theory of identity to address issues
surrounding the Trinity, one that has wider applicability in
metaphysics. The upshot of his enquiries is that belief in the Trinity
is rationally justifiable since as far as reason can take us we find
that the doctrine makes sense—at least, once the tools of
dialectic have been properly employed.

The traditional account of identity, derived from Boethius, holds that
things may be either generically, specifically, or numerically the
same or different. Abelard accepts this account but finds it not
sufficiently fine-grained to deal with the Trinity. The core of his
theory of identity, as presented in his Theologia christiana,
consists in four additional modes of identity: (1) essential sameness
and difference; (2) numerical sameness and difference, which Abelard
ties closely to essential sameness and difference, allowing a more
fine-grained distinction than Boethius could allow; (3) sameness and
difference in definition; (4) sameness and difference in property
(in proprietate). Roughly, Abelard’s account of
essential and numerical sameness is intended to improve upon the
identity-conditions for things in the world given by the traditional
account; his account of sameness in definition is meant to supply
identity-conditions for the features of things; and his account of
sameness in property opens up the possibility of there being different
identity-conditions for a single thing having several distinct
features.

Abelard holds that two things are the same in essence when
they are numerically the same concrete thing (essentia), and
essentially different otherwise. The Morning Star is essentially the
same as the Evening Star, for instance, since each is the selfsame
planet Venus. Again, the formal elements that constitute a concrete
thing are essentially the same as one another and essentially the same
as the concrete thing of which they are the formal constituents:
Socrates is his essence (Socrates is what it is to be Socrates). The
corresponding general thesis does not hold for parts, however. Abelard
maintains that the part is essentially different from the integral
whole of which it is a part, reasoning that a given part is completely
contained, along with other parts, in the whole, and so is less than
the quantity of the whole.

Numerical difference does not map precisely onto essential difference.
The failure of numerical sameness may be due to one of two causes.
First, objects are not numerically the same when one has a part that
the other does not have, in which case the objects are essentially
different as well. Second, objects are numerically different when
neither has a part belonging to the other. Numerical difference thus
entails the failure of numerical sameness, but not conversely: a part
is not numerically the same as its whole, but it is not numerically
different from its whole. Thus one thing is essentially different from
another when either they have only a part in common, in which case
they are not numerically the same; or they have no parts in common, in
which case they are numerically different as well as not numerically
the same. Since things may be neither numerically the same nor
numerically different, the question “How many things are
there?” is ill-formed as it stands and must be made more
precise, a fact Abelard exploits in his discussion of the Trinity.

Essential and numerical sameness and difference apply directly to
things in the world; they are extensional forms of identity. By
contrast, sameness and difference in definition is roughly analogous
to modern theories of the identity of properties. Abelard holds that
things are the same in definition when what it is to be one
requires that it be the other, and conversely; otherwise they differ
in definition.

Finally, things are the same in property when they specify
features that characterize one another. Abelard offers an example to
clarify this notion. A cube of marble exemplifies both whiteness and
hardness; what is white is essentially the same as what is hard, since
they are numerically the same concrete thing, namely the marble cube;
yet the whiteness and the hardness in the marble cube clearly differ
in definition—but even so, what is white is characterized by
hardness (the white thing is hard), and conversely what is hard is
characterized by whiteness (the hard thing is white). The properties
of whiteness and hardness are “mixed” since, despite their
being different in definition, each applies to the selfsame concrete
thing (namely the marble cube) as such and also as it is characterized
by the other.

The interesting case is where something has properties that
“remain so completely unmixed” that the items they
characterize are different in property. Consider a
form-matter composite in relation to its matter. The matter out of
which a form-matter composite is made is essentially the same as the
composite, since each is the entire material composite itself. Yet
despite their essential sameness, they are not identical; the matter
is not the composite, nor conversely. The matter is not the composite,
for the composite comes to be out of the matter, but the matter does
not come to be out of itself. The composite is not the matter, since
“nothing is in any way a constitutive part of or naturally prior
to itself.” Instead, the matter is prior to the composite since
it has the property priority with respect to the composite,
whereas the composite is posterior to its matter since it has the
property posteriority with respect to its matter. Now despite
being essentially the same, the matter is not characterized by
posteriority, unlike the composite, and the composite is not
characterized by priority, unlike the matter. Hence the matter and
composite are different in property; the properties priority
and posteriority are unmixed—they differ in
property.

Now for the payoff. Abelard deploys his theory of identity to shed
light on the Trinity as follows. The three Persons are essentially the
same as one another, since they are all the same concrete thing
(namely God). They differ from one another in definition, since what
it is to be the Father is not the same as what it is to be the Son or
what it is to be the Holy Spirit. The three Persons are numerically
different from one another, for otherwise they would not be three, but
they are not numerically different from God: if they were there would
be three gods, not one. Moreover, each Person has properties that
uniquely apply to it—unbegotten to the Father,
begotten to the Son, and proceeding to the Holy
Spirit—as well as properties that are distinctive of it, such as
power for the Father, wisdom for the Son, and
goodness for the Holy Spirit. The unique properties are
unmixed in Abelard’s technical sense, for the Persons differ
from one another in their unique properties, and such properties do
not apply to God; the distinctive properties are mixed, though, in
that God is characterized by each (the powerful God is the wise God is
the good God). Further than that, Abelard holds, human reason cannot
go; but reason validates the analysis (strictly speaking only a
“likeness” or analogy) as far as it can go.


====================================================================================================
TITLE: The Concept of the Aesthetic
====================================================================================================
TOC:



1. The Concept of Taste

1.1 Immediacy
1.2 Disinterest


2. The Concept of the Aesthetic

2.1 Aesthetic Objects
2.2 Aesthetic Judgment
2.3 The Aesthetic Attitude
2.4 Aesthetic Experience
2.5 Aesthetic Value

2.5.1 The Aesthetic Question
2.5.2 The Normative Question




Bibliography
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries





TEXT:

1. The Concept of Taste

The concept of the aesthetic descends from the concept of taste. Why
the concept of taste commanded so much philosophical attention during
the 18th century is a complicated matter, but this much is clear: the
eighteenth-century theory of taste emerged, in part, as a corrective
to the rise of rationalism, particularly as applied to beauty, and to
the rise of egoism, particularly as applied to virtue. Against
rationalism about beauty, the eighteenth-century theory of taste held
the judgment of beauty to be immediate; against egoism about virtue,
it held the pleasure of beauty to be disinterested.
1.1 Immediacy

Rationalism about beauty is the view that judgments of beauty are
judgments of reason, i.e., that we judge things to be beautiful by
reasoning it out, where reasoning it out typically involves inferring
from principles or applying concepts. At the beginning of the 18th
century, rationalism about beauty had achieved dominance on the
continent, and was being pushed to new extremes by “les
géomètres,” a group of literary theorists who
aimed to bring to literary criticism the mathematical rigor that
Descartes had brought to physics. As one such theorist put it:

The way to think about a literary problem is that pointed out by
Descartes for problems of physical science. A critic who tries any
other way is not worthy to be living in the present century. There is
nothing better than mathematics as propaedeutic for literary
criticism. (Terrasson 1715, Preface, 65; quoted in Wimsatt and Brooks
1957, 258)


It was against this, and against more moderate forms of rationalism
about beauty, that mainly British philosophers working mainly within
an empiricist framework began to develop theories of taste. The
fundamental idea behind any such theory—which we may call
the immediacy thesis—is that judgments of beauty are
not (or at least not canonically) mediated by inferences from
principles or applications of concepts, but rather have all the
immediacy of straightforwardly sensory judgments. It is the idea, in
other words, that we do not reason to the conclusion that things are
beautiful, but rather “sense” that they are. Here is an
early expression of the thesis, from Jean-Baptiste Dubos’s
Critical Reflections on Poetry, Painting, and Music, which
first appeared in 1719:

Do we ever reason, in order to know whether a ragoo be good or bad;
and has it ever entered into any body’s head, after having
settled the geometrical principles of taste, and defined the qualities
of each ingredient that enters into the composition of those messes,
to examine into the proportion observed in their mixture, in order to
decide whether it be good or bad? No, this is never practiced. We have
a sense given us by nature to distinguish whether the cook acted
according to the rules of his art. People taste the ragoo, and
tho’ unacquainted with those rules, they are able to tell
whether it be good or no. The same may be said in some respect of the
productions of the mind, and of pictures made to please and move us.
(Dubos 1748, vol. II, 238–239)


And here is a late expression, from Kant’s 1790 Critique of
the Power of Judgment:

If someone reads me his poem or takes me to a play that in the end
fails to please my taste, then he can adduce Batteux or Lessing, or
even older and more famous critics of taste, and adduce all the rules
they established as proofs that his poem is beautiful… . I will
stop my ears, listen to no reasons and arguments, and would rather
believe that those rules of the critics are false … than allow
that my judgment should be determined by means of a priori
grounds of proof, since it is supposed to be a judgment of taste and
not of the understanding of reason. (Kant 1790, 165)


But the theory of taste would not have enjoyed its eighteenth-century
run, nor would it continue now to exert its influence, had it been
without resources to counter an obvious rationalist objection. There
is a wide difference—so goes the objection—between judging
the excellence of a ragout and judging the excellence of a poem or a
play. More often than not, poems and plays are objects of great
complication. But taking in all that complication requires a lot of
cognitive work, including the application of concepts and the drawing
of inferences. Judging the beauty of poems and plays, then, is
evidently not immediate and so evidently not a matter of taste.

The chief way of meeting this objection was first to distinguish
between the act of grasping the object preparatory to judging it and
the act of judging the object once grasped, and then to allow the
former, but not the latter, to be as concept- and inference-mediated
as any rationalist might wish. Here is Hume, with characteristic
clarity:

[I]n order to pave the way for [a judgment of taste], and give a
proper discernment of its object, it is often necessary, we find, that
much reasoning should precede, that nice distinctions be made, just
conclusions drawn, distant comparisons formed, complicated relations
examined, and general facts fixed and ascertained. Some species of
beauty, especially the natural kinds, on their first appearance
command our affection and approbation; and where they fail of this
effect, it is impossible for any reasoning to redress their influence,
or adapt them better to our taste and sentiment. But in many orders of
beauty, particularly those of the fine arts, it is requisite to employ
much reasoning, in order to feel the proper sentiment. (Hume, 1751,
Section I)


Hume—like Shaftesbury and Hutcheson before him, and Reid after
him (Cooper 1711, 17, 231; Hutcheson 1725, 16–24; Reid 1785,
760–761)—regarded the faculty of taste as a kind of
“internal sense.” Unlike the five “external”
or “direct” senses, an “internal” (or
“reflex” or “secondary”) sense is one that
depends for its objects on the antecedent operation of some other
mental faculty or faculties. Reid characterizes internal sense as
follows:

Beauty or deformity in an object, results from its nature or
structure. To perceive the beauty therefore, we must perceive the
nature or structure from which it results. In this the internal sense
differs from the external. Our external senses may discover qualities
which do not depend upon any antecedent perception… . But it is
impossible to perceive the beauty of an object, without perceiving the
object, or at least conceiving it. (Reid 1785, 760–761)


Because of the highly complex natures or structures of many beautiful
objects, there will have to be a role for reason in their perception.
But perceiving the nature or structure of an object is one thing.
Perceiving its beauty is another.
1.2 Disinterest

Egoism about virtue is the view that to judge an action or trait
virtuous is to take pleasure in it because you believe it to serve
some interest of yours. Its central instance is the Hobbesian
view—still very much on early eighteenth-century
minds—that to judge an action or trait virtuous is to take
pleasure in it because you believe it to promote your safety. Against
Hobbesian egoism a number of British moralists—preeminently
Shaftesbury, Hutcheson, and Hume—argued that, while a judgment
of virtue is a matter of taking pleasure in response to an action or
trait, the pleasure is disinterested, by which they meant that it is
not self-interested (Cooper 1711, 220–223; Hutcheson 1725, 9,
25–26; Hume 1751, 218–232, 295–302). One argument
went roughly as follows. That we judge virtue by means of an immediate
sensation of pleasure means that judgments of virtue are judgments of
taste, no less than judgments of beauty. But pleasure in the beautiful
is not self-interested: we judge objects to be beautiful whether or
not we believe them to serve our interests. But if pleasure in the
beautiful is disinterested, there is no reason to think that pleasure
in the virtuous cannot also be (Hutcheson 1725, 9–10).

The eighteenth-century view that judgments of virtue are judgments of
taste highlights a difference between the eighteenth-century concept
of taste and our concept of the aesthetic, since for us the concepts
aesthetic and moral tend oppose one another such
that a judgment’s falling under one typically precludes its
falling under the other. Kant is chiefly responsible for introducing
this difference. He brought the moral and the aesthetic into
opposition by re-interpreting what we might call the disinterest
thesis—the thesis that pleasure in the beautiful is
disinterested (though see Cooper 1711, 222 and Home 2005, 36–38
for anticipations of Kant’s re-interpretation).

According to Kant, to say that a pleasure is interested is not to say
that it is self-interested in the Hobbesian sense, but rather that it
stands in a certain relation to the faculty of desire. The pleasure
involved in judging an action to be morally good is interested because
such a judgment issues in a desire to bring the action into existence,
i.e., to perform it. To judge an action to be morally good is to
become aware that one has a duty to perform the action, and to become
so aware is to gain a desire to perform it. By contrast, the pleasure
involved in judging an object to be beautiful is disinterested because
such a judgment issues in no desire to do anything in particular. If
we can be said to have a duty with regard to beautiful things, it
appears to be exhausted in our judging them aesthetically to be
beautiful. That is what Kant means when he says that the judgment of
taste is not practical but rather “merely contemplative”
(Kant 1790, 95).

By thus re-orienting the notion of disinterest, Kant brought the
concept of taste into opposition with the concept of morality, and so
into line, more or less, with the present concept of the aesthetic.
But if the Kantian concept of taste is continuous, more or less, with
the present-day concept of the aesthetic, why the terminological
discontinuity? Why have we come to prefer the term
‘aesthetic’ to the term ‘taste’? The not very
interesting answer appears to be that we have preferred an adjective
to a noun. The term ‘aesthetic’ derives from the Greek
term for sensory perception, and so preserves the implication of
immediacy carried by the term ‘taste.’ Kant employed both
terms, though not equivalently: according to his usage,
‘aesthetic’ is broader, picking out a class of judgments
that includes both the normative judgment of taste and the
non-normative, though equally immediate, judgment of the agreeable.
Though Kant was not the first modern to use ‘aesthetic’
(Baumgarten had used it as early as 1735), the term became widespread
only, though quickly, after his employment of it in the third
Critique. Yet the employment that became widespread was not exactly
Kant’s, but a narrower one according to which
‘aesthetic’ simply functions as an adjective corresponding
to the noun “taste.” So for example we find Coleridge, in
1821, expressing the wish that he “could find a more familiar
word than aesthetic for works of taste and criticism,” before
going on to argue:

As our language … contains no other useable adjective,
to express coincidence of form, feeling, and intellect, that
something, which, confirming the inner and the outward senses, becomes
a new sense in itself … there is reason to hope, that the term
aesthetic, will be brought into common use. (Coleridge 1821,
254)


The availability of an adjective corresponding to “taste”
has allowed for the retiring of a series of awkward expressions: the
expressions “judgment of taste,” “emotion of
taste” and “quality of taste” have given way to the
arguably less offensive ‘aesthetic judgment,’
‘aesthetic emotion,’ and ‘aesthetic quality.’
However, as the noun ‘taste’ phased out, we became saddled
with other perhaps equally awkward expressions, including the one that
names this entry.
2. The Concept of the Aesthetic

Much of the history of more recent thinking about the concept of the
aesthetic can be seen as the history of the development of the
immediacy and disinterest theses.
2.1 Aesthetic Objects

Artistic formalism is the view that the artistically relevant
properties of an artwork—the properties in virtue of which it is
an artwork and in virtue of which it is a good or bad one—are
formal merely, where formal properties are typically regarded as
properties graspable by sight or by hearing merely. Artistic formalism
has been taken to follow from both the immediacy and the disinterest
theses (Binkley 1970, 266–267; Carroll 2001, 20–40). If
you take the immediacy thesis to imply the artistic irrelevance of all
properties whose grasping requires the use of reason, and you include
representational properties in that class, then you are apt to think
that the immediacy thesis implies artistic formalism. If you take the
disinterest thesis to imply the artistic irrelevance of all properties
capable of practical import, and you include representational
properties in that class, then you are apt to think that the
disinterest thesis implies artistic formalism.

This is not to suggest that the popularity enjoyed by artistic
formalism during the late 19th and early 20th centuries owed mainly to
its inference from the immediacy or disinterest theses. The most
influential advocates of formalism during this period were
professional critics, and their formalism derived, at least in part,
from the artistic developments with which they were concerned. As a
critic Eduard Hanslick advocated for the pure music of Mozart,
Beethoven, Schumann, and later Brahms, and against the dramatically
impure music of Wagner; as a theorist he urged that music has no
content but “tonally moving forms” (Hanslick 1986, 29). As
a critic Clive Bell was an early champion of the post-Impressionists,
especially Cezanne; as a theorist he maintained that the formal
properties of painting—“relations and combinations of
lines and colours”—alone have artistic relevance (Bell
1958, 17–18). As a critic Clement Greenberg was abstract
expressionism’s ablest defender; as a theorist he held
painting’s “proper area of competence” to be
exhausted by flatness, pigment, and shape (Greenberg 1986,
86–87).

Not every influential defender of formalism has also been a
professional critic. Monroe Beardsley, who arguably gave formalism its
most sophisticated articulation, was not (Beardsley 1958). Nor is Nick
Zangwill, who recently has mounted a spirited and resourceful defense
of a moderate version of formalism (Zangwill 2001). But formalism has
always been sufficiently motivated by art-critical data that once
Arthur Danto made the case that the data no longer supported it, and
perhaps never really had, formalism’s heyday came to an end.
Inspired in particular by Warhol’s Brillo Boxes, which
are (more or less) perceptually indistinguishable from the
brand-printed cartons in which boxes of Brillo were delivered to
supermarkets, Danto observed that for most any artwork it is possible
to imagine both (a) another object that is perceptually indiscernible
from it but which is not an artwork, and (b) another artwork that is
perceptually indiscernible from it but which differs in artistic
value. From these observations he concluded that form alone neither
makes an artwork nor gives it whatever value it has (Danto 1981,
94–95; Danto 1986, 30–31; Danto 1997, 91).

But Danto has taken the possibility of such perceptual indiscernibles
to show the limitations not merely of form but also of aesthetics, and
he has done so on the grounds, apparently, that the formal and the
aesthetic are co-extensive. Regarding a urinal Duchamp once exhibited
and a perceptual indiscernible ordinary urinal, Danto maintains
that

aesthetics could not explain why one was a work of fine art and the
other not, since for all practical purposes they were aesthetically
indiscernible: if one was beautiful, the other one had to be
beautiful, since they looked just alike. (Danto 2003, 7)


But the inference from the limits of the artistically formal to the
limits of the artistically aesthetic is presumably only as strong as
the inferences from the immediacy and disinterest theses to artistic
formalism, and these are not beyond question. The inference from the
disinterest thesis appears to go through only if you employ a stronger
notion of disinterest than the one Kant understands himself to be
employing: Kant, it is worth recalling, regards poetry as the highest
of the fine arts precisely because of its capacity to employ
representational content in the expression of what he calls
‘aesthetic ideas’ (Kant 1790, 191–194; see Costello
2008 and 2013 for extended treatment of the capacity of Kantian
aesthetics to accommodate conceptual art). The inference from the
immediacy thesis appears to go through only if you employ a notion of
immediacy stronger than the one Hume, for example, takes himself to be
defending when he claims (in a passage quoted in section1.1) that
“in many orders of beauty, particularly those of the fine arts,
it is requisite to employ much reasoning, in order to feel the proper
sentiment” (Hume 1751, 173). It may be that artistic formalism
results if you push either of the tendencies embodied in the immediacy
and disinterest theses to extremes. It may be that the history of
aesthetics from the 18th century to the mid-Twentieth is largely the
history of pushing those two tendencies to extremes. It does not
follow that those tendencies must be so pushed.

Consider Warhol’s Brillo Boxes. Danto is right to
maintain that the eighteenth-century theorist of taste would not know
how to regard it as an artwork. But this is because the
eighteenth-century theorist of taste lives in the 18th century, and so
would be unable to situate that work in its twentieth-century
art-historical context, and not because the kind of theory she holds
forbids her from situating a work in its art-historical context. When
Hume, for instance, observes that artists address their works to
particular, historically-situated audiences, and that a critic
therefore “must place herself in the same situation as the
audience” to whom a work is addressed (Hume 1757, 239), he is
allowing that artworks are cultural products, and that the properties
that works have as the cultural products they are are among the
“ingredients of the composition” that a critic must grasp
if she is to feel the proper sentiment. Nor does there seem to be
anything in the celebrated conceptuality of Brillo Boxes, nor
of any other conceptual work, that ought to give the
eighteenth-century theorist pause. Francis Hutcheson asserts that
mathematical and scientific theorems are objects of taste (Hutcheson
1725, 36–41). Alexander Gerard asserts that scientific
discoveries and philosophical theories are objects of taste (Gerard
1757, 6). Neither argues for his assertion. Both regard it as
commonplace that objects of intellect may be objects of taste as
readily as objects of sight and hearing may be. Why should the
present-day aesthetic theorist think otherwise? If an object is
conceptual in nature, grasping its nature will require intellectual
work. If grasping an object’s conceptual nature requires
situating it art-historically, then the intellectual work required to
grasp its nature will include situating it art-historically.
But—as Hume and Reid held (see section 1.1)—grasping the
nature of an object preparatory to aesthetically judging it is one
thing; aesthetically judging the object once grasped is another.

Though Danto has been the most influential and persistent critic of
formalism, his criticisms are no more decisive than those advanced by
Kendall Walton in his essay “Categories of Art.”
Walton’s anti-formalist argument hinges on two main theses, one
psychological and one philosophical. According to the psychological
thesis, which aesthetic properties we perceive a work as having
depends on which category we perceive the work as belonging to.
Perceived as belonging to the category of painting, Picasso’s
Guernica will be perceived as “violent, dynamic, vital,
disturbing” (Walton 1970, 347). But perceived as belonging to
the category of “guernicas”—where guernicas are
works with “surfaces with the colors and shapes of
Picasso’s Guernica, but the surfaces are molded to
protrude from the wall like relief maps of different kinds of
terrain”—Picasso’s Guernica will be
perceived not as violent and dynamic, but as “cold, stark,
lifeless, or serene and restful, or perhaps bland, dull, boring”
(Walton 1970, 347). That Picasso’s Guernica can be
perceived both as violent and dynamic and as not violent and not
dynamic might be thought to imply that there is no fact of the matter
whether it is violent and dynamic. But this implication holds only on
the assumption that there is no fact of the matter which category
Picasso’s Guernica actually belongs to, and this
assumption appears to be false given that Picasso intended that
Guernica be a painting and did not intend that it be a
guernica, and that the category of paintings was well-established in
the society in which Picasso painted it while the category of
guernicas was not. Hence the philosophical thesis, according to which
the aesthetic properties a work actually has are those it is perceived
as having when perceived as belonging to the category (or categories)
it actually belongs to. Since the properties of having been intended
to be a painting and having been created in a society in which
painting is well-established category are artistically relevant though
not graspable merely by seeing (or hearing) the work, it seems that
artistic formalism cannot be true. “I do not deny,” Walton
concludes, “that paintings and sonatas are to be judged solely
on what can be seen or heard in them—when they are perceived
correctly. But examining a work with the senses can by itself reveal
neither how it is correct to perceive it, nor how to perceive it that
way” (Walton 1970, 367).

But if we cannot judge which aesthetic properties paintings and
sonatas have without consulting the intentions and the societies of
the artists who created them, what of the aesthetic properties of
natural items? With respect to them it may appear as if there is
nothing to consult except the way they look and sound, so that an
aesthetic formalism about nature must be true. Allen Carlson, a
central figure in the burgeoning field of the aesthetics of nature,
argues against this appearance. Carlson observes that Walton’s
psychological thesis readily transfers from works of art to natural
items: that we perceive Shetland ponies as cute and charming and
Clydesdales as lumbering surely owes to our perceiving them as
belonging to the category of horses (Carlson 1981, 19). He also
maintains that the philosophical thesis transfers: whales actually
have the aesthetic properties we perceive them as having when we
perceive them as mammals, and do not actually have any contrasting
aesthetic properties we might perceive them to have when we perceive
them as fish. If we ask what determines which category or categories
natural items actually belong to, the answer, according to Carlson, is
their natural histories as discovered by natural science (Carlson
1981, 21–22). Inasmuch as a natural item’s natural history
will tend not to be graspable by merely seeing or hearing it,
formalism is no truer of natural items than it is of works of art.

The claim that Walton’s psychological thesis transfers to
natural items has been widely accepted (and was in fact anticipated,
as Carlson acknowledges, by Ronald Hepburn (Hepburn 1966 and 1968)).
The claim that Walton’s philosophical thesis transfers to
natural items has proven more controversial. Carlson is surely right
that aesthetic judgments about natural items are prone to be mistaken
insofar as they result from perceptions of those items as belonging to
categories to which they do not belong, and, insofar as determining
which categories natural items actually belong to requires scientific
investigation, this point seems sufficient to undercut the
plausibility of any very strong formalism about nature (see Carlson
1979 for independent objections against such formalism). Carlson,
however, also wishes to establish that aesthetic judgments about
natural items have whatever objectivity aesthetic judgments about
works of art do, and it is controversial whether Walton’s
philosophical claim transfers sufficiently to support such a claim.
One difficulty, raised by Malcolm Budd (Budd 2002 and 2003) and Robert
Stecker (Stecker1997c), is that since there are many categories in
which a given natural item may correctly be perceived, it is unclear
which correct category is the one in which the item is perceived as
having the aesthetic properties it actually has. Perceived as
belonging to the category of Shetland ponies, a large Shetland pony
may be perceived as lumbering; perceived as belonging to the category
of horses, the same pony may be perceived as cute and charming but
certainly not lumbering. If the Shetland pony were a work of art, we
might appeal to the intentions (or society) of its creator to
determine which correct category is the one that fixes its aesthetic
character. But as natural items are not human creations they can give
us no basis for deciding between equally correct but aesthetically
contrasting categorizations. It follows, according to Budd, “the
aesthetic appreciation of nature is endowed with a freedom denied to
the appreciation of art” (Budd 2003, 34), though this is perhaps
merely another way of saying that the aesthetic appreciation of art is
endowed with an objectivity denied to the appreciation of nature.
2.2 Aesthetic Judgment

The eighteenth-century debate between rationalists and theorists of
taste (or sentimentalists) was primarily a debate over the immediacy
thesis, i.e., over whether we judge objects to be beautiful by
applying principles of beauty to them. It was not primarily a debate
over the existence of principles of beauty, a matter over which
theorists of taste might disagree. Kant denied that there are any such
principles (Kant 1790, 101), but both Hutcheson and Hume affirmed
their existence: they maintained that although judgments of beauty are
judgments of taste and not of reason, taste nevertheless operates
according to general principles, which might be discovered through
empirical investigation (Hutcheson 1725, 28–35; Hume 1757,
231–233).

It is tempting to think of recent debate in aesthetics between
particularists and generalists as a revival of the eighteenth-century
debate between rationalists and theorists of taste. But the accuracy
of this thought is difficult to gauge. One reason is that it is often
unclear whether particularists and generalists take themselves merely
to be debating the existence of aesthetic principles or to be debating
their employment in aesthetic judgment. Another is that, to the degree
particularists and generalists take themselves to be debating the
employment of aesthetic principles in aesthetic judgment, it is hard
to know what they can be meaning by ‘aesthetic judgment.’
If ‘aesthetic’ still carries its eighteenth-century
implication of immediacy, then the question under debate is whether
judgment that is immediate is immediate. If ‘aesthetic’ no
longer carries that implication, then it is hard to know what question
is under debate because it is hard to know what aesthetic judgment
could be. It may be tempting to think that we can simply re-define
‘aesthetic judgment’ such that it refers to any judgment
in which an aesthetic property is predicated of an object. But this
requires being able to say what an aesthetic property is without
reference to its being immediately graspable, something no one seems
to have done. It may seem that we can simply re-define
‘aesthetic judgment’ such that it refers to any judgment
in which any property of the class exemplified by beauty is predicated
of an object. But which class is this? The classes exemplified by
beauty are presumably endless, and the difficulty is to specify the
relevant class without reference to the immediate graspability of its
members, and that is what no one seems to have done.

However we are to sort out the particularist/generalist debate,
important contributions to it include, on the side of particularism,
Arnold Isenberg’s “Critical Communication” (1949)
Frank Sibley’s “Aesthetic Concepts” (in Sibley 2001)
and Mary Mothersill’s Beauty Restored (1984) and, on
the side of generalism, Monroe Beardsley’s Aesthetics
(1958) and “On the Generality of Critical Reasons” (1962),
Sibley’s “General Reasons and Criteria in
Aesthetics” (in Sibley 2001), George Dickie’s
Evaluating Art (1987), Stephen Davies’s “Replies
to Arguments Suggesting that Critics’ Strong Evaluations Could
not be Soundly Deduced” (1995), and John Bender’s
“General but Defeasible Reasons in Aesthetic Evaluation: The
Generalist/Particularist Dispute” (1995). Of these, the papers
by Isenberg and Sibley have arguably enjoyed the greatest
influence.

Isenberg concedes that we often appeal to descriptive features of
works in support of our judgments of their value, and he allows that
this may make it seem as if we must be appealing to principles in
making those judgments. If in support of a favorable judgment of some
painting a critic appeals to the wavelike contour formed by the
figures clustered in its foreground, it may seem as if his judgment
must involve tacit appeal to the principle that any painting having
such a contour is so much the better. But Isenberg argues that this
cannot be, since no one agrees to any such principle:

There is not in all the world’s criticism a single purely
descriptive statement concerning which one is prepared to say
beforehand, ‘If it is true, I shall like that work so much the
better’ (Isenberg 1949, 338).


But if in appealing to the descriptive features of a work we are not
acknowledging tacit appeals to principles linking those features to
aesthetic value, what are we doing? Isenberg believes we are offering
“directions for perceiving” the work, i.e., by singling
out certain its features, we are “narrow[ing] down the field of
possible visual orientations” and thereby guiding others in
“the discrimination of details, the organization of parts, the
grouping of discrete objects into patterns” (Isenberg 1949,
336). In this way we get others to see what we have seen, rather than
getting them to infer what we have inferred.

That Sibley advances a variety of particularism in one paper and a
variety of generalism in another will give the appearance of
inconsistency where there is none: Sibley is a particularist of one
sort, and with respect to one distinction, and a generalist of another
sort with respect to another distinction. Isenberg, as noted, is a
particularist with respect to the distinction between descriptions and
verdicts, i.e., he maintains that there are no principles by which we
may infer from value-neutral descriptions of works to judgments of
their overall value. Sibley’s particularism and generalism, by
contrast, both have to do with judgments falling in between
descriptions and verdicts. With respect to a distinction between
descriptions and a set of judgments intermediate between descriptions
and verdicts, Sibley is straightforwardly particularist. With respect
to a distinction between a set of judgments intermediate between
descriptions and verdicts and verdicts, Sibley is a kind of generalist
and describes himself as such.

Sibley’s generalism, as set forth in “General Reasons and
Criteria in Aesthetics,” begins with the observation that the
properties to which we appeal in justification of favorable verdicts
are not all descriptive or value-neutral. We also appeal to properties
that are inherently positive, such as grace, balance, dramatic
intensity, or comicality. To say that a property is inherently
positive is not to say that any work having it is so much the better,
but rather that its tout court attribution implies value. So
although a work may be made worse on account of its comical elements,
the simple claim that a work is good because comical is intelligible
in a way that the simple claims that a work is good because yellow, or
because it lasts twelve minutes, or because it contains many puns, are
not. But if the simple claim that a work is good because comical is
thus intelligible, comicality is a general criterion for aesthetic
value, and the principle that articulates that generality is true. But
none of this casts any doubt on the immediacy thesis, as Sibley
himself observes:

I have argued elsewhere that there are no sure-fire rules by which,
referring to the neutral and non-aesthetic qualities of things, one
can infer that something is balanced, tragic, comic, joyous, and so
on. One has to look and see. Here, equally, at a different level, I am
saying that there are no sure-fire mechanical rules or procedures for
deciding which qualities are actual defects in the work; one has to
judge for oneself. (Sibley 2001, 107–108)


The “elsewhere” referred to in the first sentence is
Sibley’s earlier paper, “Aesthetic Concepts,” which
argues that the application of concepts such as
‘balanced,’ ‘tragic,’ ‘comic,’ or
‘joyous’ is not a matter of determining whether the
descriptive (i.e., non-aesthetic) conditions for their application are
met, but is rather a matter of taste. Hence aesthetic judgments are
immediate in something like the way that judgments of color, or of
flavor, are:

We see that a book is red by looking, just as we tell that the tea is
sweet by tasting it. So too, it might be said, we just see (or fail to
see) that things are delicate, balanced, and the like. This kind of
comparison between the exercise of taste and the use of the five
senses is indeed familiar; our use of the word ‘taste’
itself shows that the comparison is age-old and very natural (Sibley
2001, 13–14).


But Sibley recognizes—as his eighteenth-century forebears did
and his formalist contemporaries did not—that important
differences remain between the exercise of taste and the use of the
five senses. Central among these is that we offer reasons, or
something like them, in support of our aesthetic judgments: by
talking—in particular, by appealing to the descriptive
properties on which the aesthetic properties depend—we justify
aesthetic judgments by bringing others to see what we have seen
(Sibley 2001, 14–19).

It is unclear to what degree Sibley, beyond seeking to establish that
the application of aesthetic concepts is not condition-governed, seeks
also to define the term ‘aesthetic’ in terms of their not
being so. It is clearer, perhaps, that he does not succeed in defining
the term this way, whatever his intentions. Aesthetic concepts are not
alone in being non-condition-governed, as Sibley himself recognizes in
comparing them with color concepts. But there is also no reason to
think them alone in being non-condition-governed while also being
reason-supportable, since moral concepts, to give one example, at
least arguably also have both these features. Isolating the aesthetic
requires something more than immediacy, as Kant saw. It requires
something like the Kantian notion of disinterest, or at least
something to play the role played by that notion in Kant’s
theory.

Given the degree to which Kant and Hume continue to influence thinking
about aesthetic judgment (or critical judgment, more broadly), given
the degree to which Sibley and Isenberg continue to abet that
influence, it is not surprising that the immediacy thesis is now very
widely received. The thesis, however, has come under attack, notably
by Davies (1990) and Bender (1995). (See also Carroll (2009), who
follows closely after Davies (1990), and Dorsch (2013) for further
discussion.)

Isenberg, it will be recalled, maintains that if the critic is arguing
for her verdict, her argumentation must go something as follows:

Artworks having p are better for having p.
W is an artwork having p.
Therefore, W is so much the better for having
p.


Since the critical principle expressed in premise 1 is open to
counter-example, no matter what property we substitute for p, Isenberg
concludes that we cannot plausibly interpret the critic as arguing for
her verdict. Rather than defend the principle expressed in premise 1,
Davies and Bender both posit alternative principles, consistent with
the fact that no property is good-making in all artworks, which they
ascribe to the critic. Davies proposes that we interpret the critic as
arguing deductively from principles relativized to artistic type, that
is, from principles holding that artworks of a specific types or
categories—Italian Renaissance paintings, romantic symphonies,
Hollywood Westerns, etc.—having p are better for having it
(Davies 1990, 174). Bender proposes that we interpret the critic as
arguing inductively from principles expressing mere tendencies that
hold between certain properties and artworks—principles, in
other words, holding that artworks having p tend to be better for
having it (Bender 1995, 386).

Each proposal has its own weaknesses and strengths. A problem with
Bender’s approach is that critics do not seem to couch their
verdicts in probabilistic terms. Were a critic to say that a work is
likely to be good, or almost certainly good, or even that she has the
highest confidence that it must be good, her language would suggest
that she had not herself experienced the work, perhaps that she had
judged the work on the basis of someone else’s testimony, hence
that she is no critic at all. We would therefore have good reason to
prefer Davies’s deductive approach if only we had good reason
for thinking that relativizing critical principles to artistic type
removed the original threat of counterexample. Though it is clear that
such relativizing reduces the relative number of counterexamples, we
need good reason for thinking that it reduces that number to zero, and
Davies provides no such reason. Bender’s inductive approach, by
contrast, cannot be refuted by counterexample, but only by
counter-tendency.

If the critic argues from the truth of a principle to the truth of a
verdict—as Davies and Bender both contend—it must be
possible for her to establish the truth of the principle before
establishing the truth of the verdict. How might she do this? It seems
unlikely that mere reflection on the nature of art, or on the natures
of types of art, could yield up the relevant lists of good- and
bad-making properties. At least the literature has yet to produce a
promising account as to how this might be done. Observation therefore
seems the most promising answer. To say that the critic establishes
the truth of critical principles on the basis of observation, however,
is to say that she establishes a correlation between certain artworks
she has already established to be good and certain properties she has
already established those works to have. But then any capacity to
establish that works are good by inference from principles evidently
depends on some capacity to establish that works are good without any
such inference, and the question arises why the critic should prefer
to do by inference what she can do perfectly well without. The answer
cannot be that judging by inference from principle yields
epistemically better results, since a principle based on observations
can be no more epistemically sound than the observations on which it
is based.

None of this shows that aesthetic or critical judgment could never be
inferred from principles. It does however suggest that such judgment
is first and foremost non-inferential, which is what the immediacy
thesis holds.
2.3 The Aesthetic Attitude

The Kantian notion of disinterest has its most direct recent
descendents in the aesthetic-attitude theories that flourished from
the early to mid 20th century. Though Kant followed the British in
applying the term ‘disinterested’ strictly to pleasures,
its migration to attitudes is not difficult to explain. For Kant the
pleasure involved in a judgment of taste is disinterested because such
a judgment does not issue in a motive to do anything in particular.
For this reason Kant refers to the judgment of taste as contemplative
rather than practical (Kant 1790, 95). But if the judgment of taste is
not practical, then the attitude we bear toward its object is
presumably also not practical: when we judge an object aesthetically
we are unconcerned with whether and how it may further our practical
aims. Hence it is natural to speak of our attitude toward the object
as disinterested.

To say, however, that the migration of disinterest from pleasures to
attitudes is natural is not to say that it is inconsequential.
Consider the difference between Kant’s aesthetic theory, the
last great theory of taste, and Schopenhauer’s aesthetic theory,
the first great aesthetic-attitude theory. Whereas for Kant
disinterested pleasure is the means by which we discover things to
bear aesthetic value, for Schopenhauer disinterested attention (or
“will-less contemplation”) is itself the locus of
aesthetic value. According to Schopenhauer, we lead our ordinary,
practical lives in a kind of bondage to our own desires (Schopenhauer
1819, 196). This bondage is a source not merely of pain but also of
cognitive distortion in that it restricts our attention to those
aspects of things relevant to the fulfilling or thwarting of our
desires. Aesthetic contemplation, being will-less, is therefore both
epistemically and hedonically valuable, allowing us a desire-free
glimpse into the essences of things as well as a respite from
desire-induced pain:

When, however, an external cause or inward disposition suddenly raises
us out of the endless stream of willing, and snatches knowledge from
the thralldom of the will, the attention is now no longer directed to
the motives of willing, but comprehends things free from their
relation to the will … Then all at once the peace, always
sought but always escaping us … comes to us of its own accord,
and all is well with us. (Schopenhauer 1819, 196)


The two most influential aesthetic-attitude theories of the 20th
century are those of Edward Bullough and Jerome Stolnitz. According to
Stolnitz’s theory, which is the more straightforward of the two,
bearing an aesthetic attitude toward an object is a matter of
attending to it disinterestedly and sympathetically, where to attend
to it disinterestedly is to attend to it with no purpose beyond that
of attending to it, and to attend to it sympathetically is to
“accept it on its own terms,” allowing it, and not
one’s own preconceptions, to guide one’s attention of it
(Stolnitz 1960, 32–36). The result of such attention is a
comparatively richer experience of the object, i.e., an experience
taking in comparatively many of the object’s features. Whereas a
practical attitude limits and fragments the object of our experience,
allowing us to “see only those of its features which are
relevant to our purposes,…. By contrast, the aesthetic attitude
‘isolates’ the object and focuses upon it—the
‘look’ of the rocks, the sound of the ocean, the colors in
the painting.” (Stolnitz 1960, 33, 35).

Bullough, who prefers to speak of “psychical distance”
rather than disinterest, characterizes aesthetic appreciation as
something achieved

by putting the phenomenon, so to speak, out of gear with our actual
practical self; by allowing it to stand outside the context of our
personal needs and ends—in short, by looking at it
‘objectively’ … by permitting only such reactions
on our part as emphasise the ‘objective features of the
experience, and by interpreting even our ‘subjective’
affections not as modes of our being but rather as
characteristics of the phenomenon. (Bullough 1995, 298–299;
emphasis in original).


Bullough has been criticized for claiming that aesthetic appreciation
requires dispassionate detachment:

Bullough’s characterization of the aesthetic attitude is the
easiest to attack. When we cry at a tragedy, jump in fear at a horror
movie, or lose ourselves in the plot of a complex novel, we cannot be
said to be detached, although we may be appreciating the aesthetic
qualities of these works to the fullest… . And we can
appreciate the aesthetic properties of the fog or storm while fearing
the dangers they present. (Goldman 2005, 264)


But such a criticism seems to overlook a subtlety of Bullough’s
view. While Bullough does hold that aesthetic appreciation requires
distance “between our own self and its affections”
(Bullough 1995, 298), he does not take this to require that we not
undergo affections but quite the opposite: only if we undergo
affections have we affections from which to be distanced. So, for
example, the properly distanced spectator of a well-constructed
tragedy is not the “over-distanced” spectator who feels no
pity or fear, nor the “under-distanced” spectator who
feels pity and fear as she would to an actual, present catastrophe,
but the spectator who interprets the pity and fear she feels
“not as modes of [her] being but rather as characteristics of
the phenomenon” (Bullough 1995, 299). The properly distanced
spectator of a tragedy, we might say, understands her fear and pity to
be part of what tragedy is about.

The notion of the aesthetic attitude has been attacked from all
corners and has very few remaining sympathizers. George Dickie is
widely regarded as having delivered the decisive blow in his essay
“The Myth of the Aesthetic Attitude” (Dickie 1964) by
arguing that all purported examples of interested attention are really
just examples of inattention. So consider the case of the spectator at
a performance of Othello who becomes increasingly suspicious
of his own wife as the action proceeds, or the case of the impresario
who sits gauging the size of the audience, or the case of the father
who sits taking pride in his daughter’s performance, or the case
of the moralist who sits gauging the moral effects the play is apt to
produce in its audience. These and all such cases will be regarded by
the attitude theorist as cases of interested attention to the
performance, when they are actually nothing but cases of inattention
to the performance: the jealous husband is attending to his wife, the
impresario to the till, the father to his daughter, the moralist to
the effects of the play. But if none of them is attending to the
performance, then none of them is attending to it interestedly (Dickie
1964, 57–59).

The attitude theorist, however, can plausibly resist Dickie’s
interpretation of such examples. Clearly the impresario is not
attending to the performance, but there is no reason to regard the
attitude theorist as committed to thinking otherwise. As for the
others, it might be argued that they are all attending. The jealous
husband must be attending to the performance, since it is the action
of the play, as presented by the performance, that is making him
suspicious. The proud father must be attending to the performance,
since he is attending to his daughter’s performance, which is an
element of it. The moralist must be attending to the performance,
since he otherwise would have no basis by which to gauge its moral
effects on the audience. It may be that none of these spectators is
giving the performance the attention it demands, but that is precisely
the attitude theorist’s point.

But perhaps another of Dickie’s criticisms, one lesser known,
ultimately poses a greater threat to the ambitions of the attitude
theorist. Stolnitz, it will be recalled, distinguishes between
disinterested and interested attention according to the purpose
governing the attention: to attend disinterestedly is to attend with
no purpose beyond that of attending; to attend interestedly is to
attend with some purpose beyond that of attending. But Dickie objects
that a difference in purpose does not imply a difference in
attention:

Suppose Jones listens to a piece of music for the purpose of being
able to analyze and describe it on an examination the next day and
Smith listens to the same music with no such ulterior purpose. There
is certainly a difference in the motives and intentions of the two
men: Jones has an ulterior purpose and Smith does not, but this does
not mean Jones’s listening differs from Smith’s
… . There is only one way to listen to (to attend to)
music, although there may be a variety of motives, intentions, and
reasons for doing so and a variety of ways of being distracted from
the music. (Dickie 1964, 58).


There is again much here that the attitude theorist can resist. The
idea that listening is a species of attending can be resisted: the
question at hand, strictly speaking, is not whether Jones and Smith
listen to the music in the same way, but whether they
attend in the same way to the music they are listening to.
The contention that Jones and Smith are attending in the same way
appears to be question-begging, as it evidently depends on a principle
of individuation that the attitude theorist rejects: if Jones’s
attention is governed by some ulterior purpose and Smith’s is
not, and we individuate attention according to the purpose that
governs it, their attention is not the same. Finally, even if we
reject the attitude theorist’s principle of individuation, the
claim that there is but one way to attend to music is doubtful: one
can seemingly attend to music in myriad ways—as historical
document, as cultural artifact, as aural wallpaper, as sonic
disturbance—depending on which of the music’s features one
attends to in listening to it. But Dickie is nevertheless onto
something crucial to the degree he urges that a difference in purpose
need not imply a relevant difference in attention.
Disinterest plausibly figures in the definition of the aesthetic
attitude only to the degree that it, and it alone, focuses attention
on the features of the object that matter aesthetically. The
possibility that there are interests that focus attention on just
those same features implies that disinterest has no place in such a
definition, which in turn implies that neither it nor the notion of
the aesthetic attitude is likely to be of any use in fixing the
meaning of the term ‘aesthetic.’ If to take the aesthetic
attitude toward an object simply is to attend to its aesthetically
relevant properties, whether the attention is interested or
disinterested, then determining whether an attitude is aesthetic
apparently requires first determining which properties are the
aesthetically relevant ones. And this task seems always to result
either in claims about the immediate graspability of aesthetic
properties, which are arguably insufficient to the task, or in claims
about the essentially formal nature of aesthetic properties, which are
arguably groundless.

But that the notions of disinterest and psychical distance prove
unhelpful in fixing the meaning of the term ‘aesthetic’
does not imply that they are mythic. At times we seem unable to get by
without them. Consider the case of The Fall of
Miletus—a tragedy written by the Greek dramatist Phrynicus
and staged in Athens barely two years after the violent Persian
capture of the Greek city of Miletus in 494 BC. Herodotus records
that

[the Athenians] found many ways to express their sorrow at the fall of
Miletus, and in particular, when Phrynicus composed and produced a
play called The Fall of Miletus, the audience burst into
tears and fined him a thousand drachmas for reminding them of a
disaster that was so close to home; future productions of the play
were also banned. (Herodotus, The Histories, 359)


How are we to explain the Athenian reaction to this play without
recourse to something like interest or lack of distance? How, in
particular, are we to explain the difference between the sorrow
elicited by a successful tragedy and the sorrow elicited in this case?
The distinction between attention and inattention is of no use here.
The difference is not that the Athenians could not attend to The
Fall whereas they could attend to other plays. The difference is
that they could not attend to The Fall as they could attend
to other plays, and this because of their too intimate connection to
what attending to The Fall required their attending to.
2.4 Aesthetic Experience

Theories of aesthetic experience may be divided into two kinds
according to the kind of feature appealed to in explanation of what
makes experience aesthetic: internalist theories appeal to
features internal to experience, typically to phenomenological
features, whereas externalist theories appeal to features
external to the experience, typically to features of the object
experienced. (The distinction between internalist and externalist
theories of aesthetic experience is similar, though not identical, to
the distinction between phenomenal and epistemic conceptions of
aesthetic experience drawn by Gary Iseminger (Iseminger 2003, 100, and
Iseminger 2004, 27, 36)). Though internalist
theories—particularly John Dewey’s (1934) and Monroe
Beardsley’s (1958)—predominated during the early and
middle parts of the 20th century, externalist theories—including
Beardsley’s (1982) and George Dickie’s (1988)—have
been in the ascendance since. Beardsley’s views on aesthetic
experience make a strong claim on our attention, given that Beardsley
might be said to have authored the culminating internalist theory as
well as the founding externalist one. Dickie’s criticisms of
Beardsley’s internalism make an equally strong claim, since they
moved Beardsley—and with him most everyone else—from
internalism toward externalism.

According to the version of internalism Beardsley advances in
his Aesthetics (1958), all aesthetic experiences
have in common three or four (depending on how you count) features,
which “some writers have [discovered] through acute
introspection, and which each of us can test in his own
experience” (Beardsley 1958, 527). These are focus (“an
aesthetic experience is one in which attention is firmly fixed upon
[its object]”), intensity, and unity, where unity is a matter of
coherence and of completeness (Beardsley 1958, 527). Coherence, in
turn, is a matter of having elements that are properly connected one
to another such that

[o]ne thing leads to another; continuity of development, without gaps
or dead spaces, a sense of overall providential pattern of guidance,
an orderly cumulation of energy toward a climax, are present to an
unusual degree. (Beardsley 1958, 528)


Completeness, by contrast, is a matter having elements that
“counterbalance” or “resolve” one another such
that the whole stands apart from elements without it:

The impulses and expectations aroused by elements within the
experience are felt to be counterbalanced or resolved by other
elements within the experience, so that some degree of equilibrium or
finality is achieved and enjoyed. The experience detaches itself, and
even insulates itself, from the intrusion of alien elements.
(Beardsley 1958, 528)


Dickie’s most consequential criticism of Beardsley’s
theory is that Beardsley, in describing the phenomenology of aesthetic
experience, has failed to distinguish between the features we
experience aesthetic objects as having and the features aesthetic
experiences themselves have. So while every feature mentioned in
Beardsley’s description of the coherence of aesthetic
experience—continuity of development, the absence of gaps, the
mounting of energy toward a climax—surely is a feature we
experience aesthetic objects as having, there is no reason to think of
aesthetic experience itself as having any such features:

Note that everything referred to [in Beardsley’s description of
coherence] is a perceptual characteristic … and not an effect
of perceptual characteristics. Thus, no ground is furnished for
concluding that experience can be unified in the sense of being
coherent. What is actually argued for is that aesthetic objects are
coherent, a conclusion which must be granted, but not the one which is
relevant. (Dickie 1965, 131)


Dickie raises a similar worry about Beardsley’s description of
the completeness of aesthetic experience:

One can speak of elements being counterbalanced in the
painting and say that the painting is stable, balanced and
so on, but what does it mean to say
the experience of the spectator of the painting
is stable or balanced? … Looking at a painting in some cases
might aid some persons in coming to feel stable because it might
distract them from whatever is unsettling them, but such cases are
atypical of aesthetic appreciation and not relevant to aesthetic
theory. Aren’t characteristics attributable to the painting
simply being mistakenly shifted to the spectator? (Dickie 1965, 132)


Though these objections turned out to be only the beginning of the
debate between Dickie and Beardsley on the nature of aesthetic
experience (See Beardsley 1969, Dickie 1974, Beardsley 1970, and
Dickie 1987; see also Iseminger 2003 for a helpful overview of the
Beardsley-Dickie debate), they nevertheless went a long way toward
shaping that debate, which taken as whole might be seen as the working
out of an answer to the question “What can a theory of aesthetic
experience be that takes seriously the distinction between the
experience of features and the features of experience?” The
answer turned out to be an externalist theory of the sort that
Beardsley advances in the 1970 essay “The Aesthetic Point of
View” and that many others have advanced since: a theory
according to which an aesthetic experience just is an experience
having aesthetic content, i.e., an experience of an object as having
the aesthetic features that it has.

The shift from internalism to externalism has meant that one central
ambition of internalism—that of tying the meaning of
‘aesthetic’ to features internal to aesthetic
experience—has had to be given up. But a second, equally
central, ambition—that of accounting for aesthetic value by
grounding it in the value of aesthetic experience—has been
retained. The following section takes up the development and prospects
of such accounts.
 2.5 Aesthetic Value

To count as complete a theory of aesthetic value must answer
two questions:

What makes aesthetic value
aesthetic?
What makes aesthetic value
value?


The literature refers to the first question sometimes as the
aesthetic question (Lopes 2018, 41–43; Shelley 2019, 1) and
sometimes as the demarcation question (van der Berg 2020, 2;
Matherne 2020, 315; Peacocke 2021, 165). It refers to the second as
the normative question (Lopes 2018, 41–43; Shelley
2019, 1; Matherne 2020, 315).
2.5.1 The Aesthetic Question

The prevailing answer to the aesthetic question is aesthetic
formalism, the view that aesthetic value is aesthetic because
objects bear it in virtue of their perceptual properties, where these
encompass visual, auditory, gustatory, olfactory, and tactile
properties. Aesthetic formalism rose to prominence when and because
artistic formalism did, during the late 19th and early 20th centuries
(see Section 5.1). Because everyone then took artistic value to be a
species of aesthetic value, artistic formalism could gain prominence
only by dragging aesthetic formalism in its train. But whereas
artistic formalism has since fallen from favor, aesthetic formalism
has held its ground. The explanation, arguably, has to do with the way
aesthetic formalism honors the conceptual link between the aesthetic
and the perceptual. Any adequate answer to the aesthetic question must
meet what we may call the perceptual constraint, that is, it
must plausibly articulate the sense in which aesthetic value is
perceptual. Aesthetic formalism does this in the clearest possible
terms.

Versions of aesthetic formalism come in varying strengths. Its
strongest versions hold objects to have aesthetic value strictly in
virtue of their perceptual properties (Bell 1958/1914; Danto 2003,
92). Weaker versions either allow objects to have aesthetic value in
virtue of their non-perceptual content so long as that content
expresses itself perpetually (Zangwill 1998, 71–72) or require merely
that objects paradigmatically have aesthetic value in virtue of their
perceptual properties (Levinson 1996, 6). All versions of aesthetic
formalism struggle, one way or another, to accommodate our
long-standing practice of ascribing aesthetic value to objects that do
not address themselves primarily to the five bodily senses. Consider
works of literature. We have been ascribing aesthetic value to them
for as long as we have been ascribing aesthetic value to artworks of
any kind. How might the aesthetic theorist square her theory with this
practice? A first approach is simply to dismiss that practice,
regarding its participants as linguistically confused, as applying
terms of aesthetic praise to objects constitutionally incapable of
meriting it (Danto 2003, 92). But given how extremely revisionist this
approach is, we ought to wait on an argument of proportionately
extreme strength before adopting it. A second approach allows that
literary works bear aesthetic value, but only in virtue of their
sensory properties, such as properties associated with assonance,
consonance, rhythm, and imagery (Urmson 1957, 85–86, 88;
Zangwill 2001, 135–140). But this approach accounts for a mere
fraction of the aesthetic value we routinely ascribe to works of
literature. Suppose you praise a short story for the eloquence of its
prose and the beauty of its plot-structure. It seems arbitrary to
count only the eloquence as a genuine instance of aesthetic value. A
third approach treats literary works as exceptional, allowing them,
alone among works of art, to bear aesthetic value in virtue of their
non-perceptual properties (Binkley 1970, 269;
Levinson 1996, 6 n.9). The difficulty here
is to explain literature’s exceptionality. If literary works
somehow bear aesthetic value in virtue of non-perceptual properties,
what prevents non-literary works from doing the same? Moreover, to
whatever degree we allow things to have aesthetic value in virtue of
their non-perceptual properties, to that degree we sever the
connection the formalist asserts between the aesthetic and the
perceptual and so undermine our reason for adopting aesthetic
formalism in the first place.

We might be forced to choose from among these three formalist
approaches to literature if aesthetic formalism constituted the only
plausible articulation of the sense in which aesthetic value is
perceptual, but it doesn’t. Instead of holding that aesthetic
value is perceptual because things have it in virtue of their
perpetual properties, one might hold that aesthetic value is
perceptual because we perceive things as having it. This would be a
corollary of the immediacy thesis as defined in Section 1.1. If, as
that thesis holds, aesthetic judgment is perceptual, having all the
immediacy of any standard perceptual judgment, then aesthetic
properties are perceptual, grasped with all the immediacy of standard
perceptual properties. That aesthetic properties are thus perceptual
is Sibley’s point in the following:

It is of importance to note first that, broadly speaking, aesthetics
deals with a kind of perception. People have to see the grace
or unity of a work, hear the plaintiveness or frenzy in the
music, notice the gaudiness of a colour scheme, feel
the power of a novel, its mood, or its uncertainty of tone. (Sibley
2001, 34, emphasis in original)


Sibley says that people have to see the grace or unity of a work and
they have to feel the power of a novel. He doesn’t say that they
have to see the properties in virtue of which a work has grace or
unity or feel the properties in virtue of which a novel has power: the
properties in virtue of which a work has grace or unity need not be
perceptual and the properties in virtue of which a novel has power
presumably will not be. Thus the literature problem, over which
formalism stumbles, does not arise for Sibley, nor for anyone else
committed to the immediacy thesis, including
Shaftesbury (Cooper 1711, 17, 231), Hutcheson (1725,
16–24), Hume (1751, Section I), and Reid (1785, 760–761),
among others. For the immediacy theorist, the aesthetic value we
ascribe to literary works is aesthetic because we perceive literary
works as bearing it.
2.5.2 The Normative Question

The prevailing answer to the normative question is aesthetic
hedonism, the view that aesthetic value is value because things
having it give pleasure when experienced. Aesthetic hedonism achieved
prominence in the 19th century, roughly when aesthetic formalism did.
Schopenhauer played a pivotal role in bringing it to prominence by
reassigning disinterested pleasure from the role it had been playing
in aesthetic judgment to the role of grounding aesthetic value
(Schopenhauer 1818 [1969], 195–200). Bentham (1789, ch. 4) and
Mill (1863 [2001]; ch. 2) arguably played larger roles by popularizing
value hedonism, that is, the view that pleasure is the ground of all
value. But whereas value hedonism no longer holds much sway in ethics,
and Schopenhauer no longer exerts much influence in aesthetics,
aesthetic hedonism has held its ground. The explanation presumably has
to do with the apparent ease with which aesthetic hedonism explains
why we seek out objects of aesthetic value. Any adequate answer to the
normative question must meet what we may call the normative
constraint, that is, it must plausibly identify what a
thing’s having aesthetic value gives us reason to do. Aesthetic
hedonism, locating that reason in the pleasure taken in experiencing
aesthetically valuable objects, does this in the clearest possible
terms.

Advocates of aesthetic hedonism include Schopenhauer 1818 [1969], Clive
Bell 1914 [1958], C. I. Lewis 1946, Monroe Beardsley 1982, George Dickie
1988, Alan Goldman 1990, Kendall Walton 1993, Malcolm Budd 1995,
Jerrold Levinson 1996, 2002, Gary Iseminger 2004, Robert Stecker 2006,
2019, Nick Stang 2010 and Mohan Matthen 2017. It is only quite
recently that any sustained opposition to hedonism has arisen, a fact
that may go some way toward explaining why hedonists, as a rule, see
no need to argue for their view, opting instead to develop it in light
of objections an imagined opposition might make.

Beardsley, for instance, leads with this simple formulation of
hedonism:

The aesthetic value of an object is the value it possesses in virtue
of its capacity to provide aesthetic gratification. (Beardsley 1982,
21).


But he then anticipates a fatal objection. Sometimes we undervalue
aesthetic objects, finding them to have less value than they actually
have; other times we overvalue aesthetic objects, finding them to have
greater value than they actually have. The simple formulation above is
consistent with undervaluation, since it is possible to take less
aesthetic pleasure from an object than it has the capacity to provide,
but inconsistent with overvaluation, since it is impossible to take
greater aesthetic pleasure from an object than it has the capacity to
provide (Beardsley 1982, 26–27). To remedy this problem,
Beardsley appends a rider:

The aesthetic value of [an object] is the value [it] possesses in
virtue of its capacity to provide aesthetic gratification when
correctly and completely experienced (Beardsley 1982, 27, italics
in original).


Suppose we refer to the italicized portion of this formulation as
the epistemic qualification and the non-italicized portion as
the hedonic thesis. The epistemic qualification renders the
hedonic thesis consistent with overvaluation, given that you can
misapprehend an object such that you take greater aesthetic pleasure
from it than it has the capacity to provide when apprehended correctly
and completely.

Beardsley’s version of aesthetic hedonism has served as a model
for subsequent versions (Levinson 2002, n. 23); at least all
subsequent versions consist of an epistemically qualified hedonic
thesis in some form. Beardsley’s version, however, seems open to
counter-example. Consider Tony Morrison’s Beloved, for
instance, or Cormac McCarthy’s Blood Meridian. Taking
pleasure from works designed to cause shock, horror, despair, or moral
revulsion may seem perverse; surely, it may seem, such works do not
have whatever aesthetic value they have in virtue of any pleasure they
give. One way to accommodate such cases is to cast aesthetic pleasure
as a higher-order response, that is, a response that depends on
lower-order responses, which in some cases might include shock,
horror, despair, and moral revulsion (Walton 1993, 508; Levinson 1992,
18). Another way is to broaden the field of experiences that may
ground aesthetic value. Though pleasure as a rule grounds aesthetic
value, in exceptional cases certain non-hedonic yet intrinsically
valuable experiences—which may include horror, shock, despair,
and revulsion—may also do so (Levinson 1992, 12; Stecker 2005,
12). The literature refers to this latter, broadened variety of
hedonism as aesthetic empiricism; it hasn’t settled on
a name for the former variety, but we may call it tiered
hedonism, given the varying levels of response it takes aesthetic
experience to comprise.

Yet another objection, anticipated by hedonists, holds hedonism to
imply the heresy of the separable experience (Budd 1985,
125). It is a commonplace that for any object bearing aesthetic value
nothing other than it can have just the particular value it has,
excepting the improbable case in which something other than it has
just its particular aesthetic character. The worry is that hedonism,
given that it regards aesthetic value as instrumental to the value of
experience, implies that for any object bearing aesthetic value
something wholly other from it, such as a drug, might induce the same
experience and so serve up the same value. The hedonist’s usual
reply is to assert that aesthetic experience is inseparable from its
object, such that for any aesthetic experience, that experience is
just the particular experience it is because it has just the
particular aesthetic object it has (Levinson 1996, 22–23; Budd
1985, 123–124; S. Davies 1994: 315–16; Stang 2012,
271–272).

Actual opposition to hedonism did not materialize until the present
century (Sharpe 2000, Davies 2004), and most all of that during the
past decade or so (Shelley 2010, 2011, 2019; Wolf 2011; Lopes 2015,
2018; Gorodeisky 2021a, 2021b). Why the opposition took so long to
show up is a good question. It is tempting to think its answer resides
in the obvious truth of the hedonist’s central premise, namely,
that aesthetically valuable objects please us, at least in general.
Anti-hedonists, however, have taken no interest in denying this
premise. One useful way to think of the dialectic between hedonists
and their opponents is to regard each as grasping one horn of an
aesthetic version of the Euthyphro dilemma, where hedonists hold
things to have aesthetic value because they please and anti-hedonists
hold things to please because they have aesthetic value (Augustine
2005/389–391, De vera religione §59; Gorodeisky
2012a, 201 and 2021b, 262). Seen this way, the fact that aesthetically
valuable things please tells not at all in favor of the hedonist;
indeed, it is precisely this fact that the anti-hedonist thinks the
hedonist cannot explain.

For instance, Wolf, in the context of an extended, nuanced case
against value welfarism, argues that aesthetic hedonism cannot account
for the fact that Middlemarch is a better novel than the
Da Vinci Code,given that most people apparently like the latter
better, presumably because it gives them greater pleasure (Wolf 2011,
54–55; see also Sharpe 2000, 326). The hedonist has a ready
reply in the claim that all standard versions of hedonism are now
epistemically qualified, that while most people may derive greater
pleasure from the Da Vinci Code, a fully informed
reader—that is, a reader who gives both texts a correct and
complete reading—will not, assuming Middlemarch to be
the better novel. But it’s not clear how much appeal to the
epistemic qualification ultimately helps the hedonist. The
anti-hedonist will want to know what best explains the fact that a
fully informed reader will derive greater pleasure from
Middlemarch (Wolf 2011, 55; D. Davies 2004, 258–259;
Sharpe 2000, 325). Suppose we say that it owes to the fully informed
reader’s grasping the superiority of
Middlemarch’s structure, the higher quality of its
prose, the greater subtlety and depth of its character development,
and the greater penetration of the insights it affords (Wolf 2011,
55). Wouldn’t we then be saying that it owes to her grasping the
greater aesthetic value of Middlemarch? Wouldn’t that
be part of what a fully informed reader is fully informed about?

Of course, the hedonist may allow Middlemarch to be
aesthetically better because of its superior structure, prose,
character development, and insight; to allow this, from her point of
view, is simply to allow that these are the elements in virtue of
which a fully informed reader will derive greater pleasure. But here
it would be good if the hedonist had an argument. Otherwise, the
anti-hedonist will rightly wonder how it is that a correct and
complete experience of Middlemarch will be an experience of
every value-conferring feature of Middlemarch yet not an
experience of the value conferred by those features. She will rightly
wonder whether the hedonist fails to honor her own commitment to
externalism about aesthetic value; she will rightly wonder, in other
words, whether the hedonist fails to distinguish between a valuable
experience and an experience of value, just as the internalist about
aesthetic value fails to distinguish between a coherent and complete
experience and an experience of coherence and completeness.

Earlier we attributed the appeal of hedonism to the apparent ease with
which it explains our seeking out objects of aesthetic value.
Anti-hedonists take that ease to be apparent merely. Some
anti-hedonists, for instance, argue that at least some aesthetically
valuable objects offer up pleasure only on condition that we do not
seek it (Lopes 2018, 84–86; Ven der Berg 2020, 5–6; see
also Elster 1983, 77–85). Lopes puts the point this way:

Sometimes an agent has an aesthetic reason to act and yet they could
not be motivated to act out of a hedonic desire that would be
satisfied by their so acting. To get any pleasure, they must act out
of non-hedonic motives. Strolling through the Louvre, they happen upon
the Chardins, and they look at them. So long as they do not look
seeking pleasure, they get the pleasure that the paintings afford
(Lopes 2018, 85–86).


Lopes’s choice of example is not arbitrary. There are particular
art-critical reasons for thinking that Chardins will frustrate the
hedonically motivated viewer (Fried 1980, 92; cited in Lopes 2018,
85), and Lopes is careful to claim that only “some aesthetic
pleasures are essential by-products of acts motivated by other
considerations” (Lopes 2018, 85). But it’s not as if
Lopes’s claim is specific to Chardins. Consider again
Wolf’s assertation that most readers take greater pleasure from
The Da Vinci Code than from Middlemarch. If that
assertion is correct, as it plausibly is, perhaps this is because (a)
most readers read for pleasure, and (b) The Da Vinci Code
affords pleasure to readers who read for it, whereas (c)
Middlemarch withholds pleasure from such readers, affording
pleasure instead on readers who read in pursuit of some non-hedonic
good.

There is an apparent tension, moreover, between the hedonist’s
reliance on the epistemic qualification and her claim that pleasure
rationalizes our aesthetic pursuits. Consider the
less-than-fully-informed reader who overvalues The Da Vinci
Code and undervalues Middlemarch. The epistemic
qualification is designed to allow the hedonist to explain how this
might occur: such a reader takes greater pleasure from The Da
Vinci Code, and less (or lesser) pleasure from
Middlemarch, than she would were she fully informed. The
epistemic qualification, moreover, allows the hedonist to explain why
the uninformed reader has aesthetic reason not to undervalue
Middlemarch: she is missing out on pleasure that would be
hers if only she gave Middlemarch a fully informed reading.
But the hedonist struggles to explain why the uninformed reader has
reason not to overvalue the Da Vinci Code. If The Da
Vinci Code gives the reader greater pleasure when she overvalues
it, not only has she no aesthetic reason to be fully informed, she has
aesthetic reason not to be. It therefore seems that if pleasure
rationalized our hedonic pursuits, we would take ourselves to have
reason to experience aesthetic objects in whatever way maximizes our
pleasure. To the degree that we instead take ourselves to have reason
to experience aesthetic objects completely and correctly—to the
degree that we instead take ourselves to have reason to experience
aesthetic objects as having the aesthetic values they in fact
have—suggests that pleasure is not the aesthetic good
we’re after (Shelley 2011).

But if pleasure is not the aesthetic good we’re after, what is?
Part of hedonism’s perceived inevitability over the past century
or so has owed to our inability even to imagine alternatives to it. If
opposition to hedonism has been slow to materialize, alternatives have
been slower still. To date, the only fully realized alternative to
hedonism is Lopes’s network theory of aesthetic normativity,
articulated and defended in his ground-breaking Being for Beauty:
Aesthetic Agency and Value (2018).

Earlier we noted how Lopes challenges the hedonist on her own terms,
objecting that she cannot adequately explain why we seek out objects
of aesthetic value, given that aesthetic pleasure is at least
sometimes an essential by-product of our seeking after something else
(2018, 84–86). Lopes’s deeper challenge, however, targets
the hedonist’s very terms. Aesthetic considerations rationalize
a very great variety of aesthetic acts, according to Lopes:
appreciating objects of aesthetic value is one such act, but so too is
hanging a poster one way rather than another, selecting this book
rather than that one for a book club, building out a garden this way
rather than that, conserving one video game rather than another,
pairing this dish with this wine rather than that one, and so on
ad infinitum (2018, 32–36). If a theory of aesthetic
value is to accommodate such a vast range of aesthetic acts, without
singling out any one as more central than the others, it will have to
conceive of aesthetic normativity as a species of some very general
kind of normativity. Lopes, accordingly, conceives of aesthetic
normativity as a species of the most generic form of practical
normativity; that aesthetic acts ought to be performed well follows
from the premise that all acts ought to be performed well for the
simple reason that they are acts (2018, 135–137). As Lopes puts
it: “Aesthetic values inherit their practical normativity from a
basic condition of all agency—agents must use what they have to
perform successfully” (2018, 135). Just which competencies an
aesthetic agent may call upon to perform successfully on any given
occasion depends on the particular role they happen to be playing in
the particular social practice in which they happen to be performing
(2018, 135). It is from the fact that all aesthetic activity
necessarily takes place within the domain of some particular social
practice that the network theory of aesthetic value takes its name
(2018, 119).

In holding aesthetic agents to be performing the greatest variety of
aesthetic acts on the greatest variety of items in coordination with
one another, the network theory departs radically from hedonism. But,
as Lopes himself observes, the network theory follows after hedonism
in one fundamental way: inasmuch as both theories “answer the
normative question but offer nothing in answer to the aesthetic
question,” both “are consistent with any stand-alone
answer to the aesthetic question” (2018, 48). The claim that the
normative and aesthetic questions admit of stand-alone answers implies
that aesthetic value is a species of the genus value
in a standard species-genus relation, such that what makes aesthetic
value value has no bearing on what makes it aesthetic and vice-versa.
It therefore also implies that aesthetic value is not a
determinate of the determinable value, such that what makes
aesthetic value aesthetic is very thing that makes it value.

Do answers to the normative and aesthetic questions stand alone or
stand together? If we have not yet registered the urgency of this
question, perhaps that is because no one has yet fully articulated,
let alone defended, a theory of aesthetic value according to which
aesthetic value is a determinate form of value. Such a theory appears
to be implicit, however, in Shelley 2011, Watkins and Shelley 2012,
Gorodeisky and Marcus 2018, Gorodeisky 2021a, and Shelley 2022. The
position common to these authors has been dubbed the Auburn
view (Van der Berg 2020, 11). It answers the aesthetic question,
and therein the value question, by holding an item’s having
aesthetic value to rationalize its appreciation in a distinctively
self-reflexive way, such that part of what you perceive when you
appreciate an aesthetically valuable item is that it ought to be
appreciated as you appreciating it (Shelley 2011, 220–222;
Watkins and Shelley 2012, 348–350; Gorodeisky and Marcus 2018,
117–119; Gorodeisky 2021a, 200, 207; Shelley 2022, 12). The
network theorist may object that the Auburn view privileges acts of
appreciation as surely as hedonism does, but such an objection, from
the Auburn perspective, begs the question. It is in assuming that the
normative and aesthetic questions admit of stand-alone answers that
the network theorist grants herself the freedom of passing on the
aesthetic question, and it is in passing on the aesthetic question
that she grants herself the freedom of treating each of a very great
variety of aesthetic acts as equally central. It is in assuming that
aesthetic value is a determinate of the determinable
value, meanwhile, that the Auburnite places herself under the
necessity of answering the aesthetic question, and it is in seeking an
answer to the aesthetic question that she places herself under the
necessity of singling out appreciation as aesthetically central. The
network theorist and the Auburnite agree that the aesthetic question
deserves an answer sooner or later (Lopes 2018, 46). They disagree,
crucially, about whether it deserves an answer sooner rather than
later.

The network theory and the Auburn view hardly exhaust the options for
non-hedonic theories of aesthetic normativity: Nguyen 2019, Matherne
2020, Peacocke 2021, Kubala 2021, and Riggle 2022 all represent
promising new directions. Yet every new theory of aesthetic value,
hedonic or not, must follow after the network theory or the Auburn
view in regarding answers to the normative and aesthetic questions as
stand-alone or stand-together. A lot hangs on the decision to follow
one path rather than the other. Perhaps it’s time we attend to
it.


====================================================================================================
TITLE: Affirmative Action
====================================================================================================
TOC:



1. In the Beginning
2. The Controversy Engaged
3. Rights and Consistency
4. Real-World Affirmative Action: The Workplace
5. Real-World Affirmative Action: The University
6. Equality’s Rule
7. Diversity’s Dominion
8. The Integration Argument
9. Desert Confounded, Desert Misapplied
Bibliography
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries





TEXT:

1. In the Beginning


In 1972, affirmative action became an inflammatory public issue.
True enough, the Civil Rights Act of 1964 already had made something
called “affirmative action” a remedy federal courts could
impose on violators of the Act. Likewise, after 1965 federal
contractors had been subject to President Lyndon Johnson’s Executive
Order 11246, requiring them to take “affirmative action” to
make sure they were not discriminating. But what did this 1965 mandate
amount to? The Executive Order assigned to the Secretary of Labor the
job of specifying rules of implementation. In the meantime, as the
federal courts were enforcing the Civil Rights Act against
discriminating companies, unions, and other institutions, the
Department of Labor mounted an ad hoc attack on the construction
industry by cajoling, threatening, negotiating, and generally
strong-arming reluctant construction firms into a series of region-wide
“plans” in which they committed themselves to numerical
hiring goals. Through these contractor commitments, the Department
could indirectly pressure recalcitrant labor unions, who supplied the
employees at job sites.


While the occasional court case and government initiative made the
news and stirred some controversy, affirmative action was pretty far
down the list of public excitements until the autumn of 1972, when the
Secretary of Labor’s Revised Order No. 4, fully implementing the
Executive Order, landed on campus by way of directives from the
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. Its predecessor, Order
No. 4, first promulgated in 1970, cast a wide net over American
institutions, both public and private. By extending to all contractors
the basic apparatus of the construction industry “plans,”
the Order imposed a one-size-fits-all system of 
“underutilization analyses,” “goals,” and
“timetables” on hospitals, banks, trucking companies,
steel mills, printers, airlines—indeed, on all the scores of
thousands of institutions, large and small, that did business with the
government, including a special set of institutions with a
particularly voluble and articulate constituency, namely, American
universities.


At first, university administrators and faculty found the rules of
Order No. 4 murky but hardly a threat to the established order. The
number of racial and ethnic minorities receiving PhDs each year and
thus eligible for faculty jobs was tiny. Any mandate to increase their
representation on campus would require more diligent searches by
universities, to be sure, but searches fated nevertheless largely to
mirror past results. The 1972 Revised Order, on the other hand, effected a
change that punctured any campus complacency: it included women among
the “protected classes” whose
“underutilization” demanded the setting of
“goals” and “timetables” for “full
utilization” (Graham 1990, 413). Unlike African-Americans and
Hispanics, women were getting PhDs in substantial and growing
numbers. If the affirmative action required of federal contractors was
a recipe for “proportional representation,” then Revised
Order No. 4 was bound to leave a large footprint on campus. Some among
the professoriate exploded in a fury of opposition to the new rules,
while others responded with an equally vehement defense of
them.[2]


As it happened, these events coincided with another development,
namely the “public turn” in philosophy. For several
decades Anglo-American philosophy had treated moral and political
questions obliquely. On the prevailing view, philosophers were suited
only to do “conceptual analysis”—they could lay
bare, for example, the conceptual architecture of the idea of justice,
but they were not competent to suggest political principles,
constitutional arrangements, or social policies that actually did
justice.  Philosophers might do “meta-ethics” but not
“normative ethics.” This viewed collapsed in the 1970s
under the weight of two counter-blows. First, John Rawls published in
1971 A Theory of Justice, an elaborate, elegant, and inspiring
defense of a normative theory of justice (Rawls 1971).
Second, in the same year Philosophy & Public Affairs,
with Princeton University’s impeccable pedigree, began life, a few
months after Florida State’s Social Theory and
Practice. These journals, along with a re-tooled older
periodical, Ethics, became self-conscious platforms for
socially and politically engaged philosophical writing, born out of
the feeling that in time of war (the Vietnam War) and social tumult
(the Civil Rights Movement, Women’s Liberation), philosophers ought to
do, not simply talk about, ethics.  In 1973, Philosophy &
Public Affairs published Thomas Nagel’s “Equal Treatment
and Compensatory Justice” (Nagel 1973) and Judith Jarvis
Thomson’s “Preferential Hiring” (Thomson 1973), and the
philosophical literature on affirmative action burgeoned
 forth.[3]


In contention was the nature of those “goals” and
“timetables” imposed on every contractor by Revised Order
No. 4. Weren’t the “goals” tantamount to
“quotas,” requiring institutions to use racial or gender
preferences in their selection processes? Some answered
“no” (Ezorsky 1977, 86).  Properly understood, affirmative
action did not require (or even permit) the use of gender or racial
preferences.  Others said “yes” (Goldman 1976, 182–3).
Affirmative action, if it did not impose preferences outright, at
least countenanced them.  Among the yea-sayers, opinion divided
between those who said preferences were morally permissible and those
who said they were not.  Within the “morally permissible”
set, different writers put forward different justifications.
2. The Controversy Engaged


The essays by Thomson and Nagel defended the use of preferences but on
different grounds. Thomson endorsed job preferences for women and
African-Americans as a form of redress for their past exclusion
from the academy and the workplace. Preferential policies, in her
view, worked a kind of justice. Nagel, by contrast, argued that
preferences might work a kind of social good, and without doing
violence to justice.  Institutions could for one or another good
reason properly depart from standard meritocratic selection criteria
because the whole system of tying economic reward to earned
credentials was itself indefensible.


Justice and desert lay at the heart of subsequent arguments. Several
writers took to task Thomson’s argument that preferential hiring
justifiably makes up for past wrongs. Preferential hiring seen as
redress looks perverse, they contended, since it benefits
individuals (African-Americans and women possessing good educational
credentials) least likely harmed by past wrongs while it burdens
individuals (younger white male applicants) least likely to be
responsible for past wrongs (Simon 1974, 315–19; Sher 1975, 162;
Sher 1979, 81–82; and Goldman 1976, 
190–1).[4]
 Instead of doing justice, contended the critics, preferential
treatment violated rights. What rights were at issue? The right of an
applicant “to equal consideration” (Thomson 1973, 377;
Simon 1974, 312), the right of the maximally competent to an open
position (Goldman 1976, 191; Goldman 1979, 24–8), or the right
of everyone to equal opportunity (Gross 1977a, 382; Gross 1978,
97). Moreover, according to the critics, preferential treatment
confounded desert by severing reward from a “person’s character,
talents, choices and abilities” (Simon 1979, 96), by
“subordinating merit, conduct, and character to race”
(Eastland and Bennett 1979, 144), and by disconnecting outcomes from
actual liability and damage (Gross 1978, 125–42).


Defenders of preferences were no less quick to enlist justice and
desert in their cause. Mary Anne Warren, for example, argued that in a
context of entrenched gender discrimination, gender preferences might
improve the “overall fairness” of job selections. Justice
and individual desert need not be violated.


If individual men’s careers are temporarily set back because
of…[job preferences given to women], the odds are good that
these same men will have benefited in the past and/or will benefit in
the future—not necessarily in the job competition, but in some
ways—from sexist discrimination against women. Conversely, if
individual women receive apparently unearned bonuses [through
preferential selection], it is highly likely that these same women will
have suffered in the past and/or will suffer in the future
from…sexist attitudes. (Warren 1977, 256)




Likewise, James Rachels defended racial preferences as devices to
neutralize unearned advantages by whites. Given the pervasiveness of
racial discrimination, it is likely, he argued, that the superior
credentials offered by white applicants do not reflect their greater
effort, desert, or even ability. Rather, the credentials reflect their
mere luck at being born white. “Some white…[applicants]
have better qualifications…only because they have not had to
contend with the obstacles faced by their African-American
competitors” (Rachels 1978, 162).  Rachels was less confident
than Warren that preferences worked uniformly accurate
offsets. Reverse discrimination might do injustice to some whites; yet
its absence would result in injustices to African-Americans who have
been unfairly handicapped by their lesser advantages.


Rachels’ diffidence was warranted in light of the counter-responses.
If racial and gender preferences for jobs (or college admissions) were
supposed to neutralize unfair competitive advantages, they needed to
be calibrated to fit the variety of backgrounds aspirants brought to
any competition for these goods. Simply giving blanket preferences to
African-Americans or women seemed much too ham-handed an approach if
the point was to micro-distribute opportunities fairly (Sher 1975,
165ff).
3. Rights and Consistency


To many of its critics, reverse discrimination was simply
incoherent. When “the employers and the schools favor
women and blacks,” objected Lisa Newton, they commit the same
injustice perpetrated by Jim Crow discrimination. “Just as the
previous discrimination did, this reverse discrimination violates the
public equality which defines citizenship” (Newton 1973,
 310).[5]


William Bennett and Terry Eastland likewise saw racial preferences
as in some sense illogical:


To count by race, to use the means of numerical equality to achieve
the end of moral equality, is counterproductive, for to count by race
is to deny the end by virtue of the means. The means of race counting
will not, cannot, issue in an end where race does not 
 matter (Eastland and Bennett 1979,
 149).[6]



When Eastland and Bennett alluded to those who favored using race to
get to a point where race doesn’t count, they had in mind specifically
the Supreme Court’s Justice Blackmun who, in the famous 1978
Bakke case (discussed below), put his own view in just those
simple terms. For Blackmun, the legitimacy of racial preferences was
to be measured by how fast using them moves us toward a society where
race doesn’t matter (a view developed in subtle detail by the
philosopher Richard Wasserstrom in Wasserstrom 1976). While the
critics of preferences claimed to find the very idea of using race to
end racism illogical and incoherent, they also fell back on principle
to block Blackmun’s instrumental defense should it actually prove both
reasonable and plausible. “The moral issue comes in classic
form,” wrote Carl Cohen. “Terribly important
objectives…appear to require impermissible means.”  Cohen asked,
“might we not wink at the Constitution this once” and allow
preferences to do their good work (Cohen 1995, 20)?  Neither he nor
other critics thought so.  Principle must hold firm. “[I]n the
distribution of benefits under the laws all racial
classifications are invidious” (Cohen 1995, 52).


But what, exactly, is the principle—constitutional or
moral—that always bars the use of race as a means to
“terribly important objectives”? Alan Goldman did more
than anyone in the early debate to formulate and ground a relevant
principle. Using a contractualist framework, he surmised that rational
contractors would choose a rule of justice requiring positions to be
awarded by competence. On its face, this rule would seem to preclude
filling positions by reference to factors like race and gender that
are unrelated to competence. However, Goldman’s
“rule” blocked preferences only under certain empirical
conditions. Goldman explained the derivation of the rule and its
consequent limit this way:


The rule for hiring the most competent was justified as part of a
right to equal opportunity to succeed through socially productive
effort, and on grounds of increased welfare for all members of society.
Since it is justified in relation to a right to equal opportunity, and
since the application of the rule may simply compound injustices when
opportunities are unequal elsewhere in the system, the creation of more
equal opportunities takes precedence when in conflict with the rule for
awarding positions. Thus short-run violations of the rule are justified
to create a more just distribution of benefits by applying the rule
itself in future years. (Goldman 1979, 164–165).




In other words, if “terribly important
objectives” having to do with
equalizing opportunities in a system rife with unjust inequalities could in
fact be furthered by measured and targeted reverse
discrimination, justice wouldn’t stand in the way. Goldman’s principle
did not have the adamantine character Cohen and other critics sought
in a bar to preferences. Where can such an unyielding principle be
found? I postpone further examination of this question until I discuss
the Bakke case, below, whose split opinions constitute an
extended debate on the meaning of constitutional equality.
4. Real-World Affirmative Action: The Workplace


The terms of the popular debate over racial and gender preferences
often mirrored the arguments philosophers and other academics were
making to each other. Preference’s defenders offered many reasons to
justify them, reasons having to do with compensatory or distributive
justice, as well as reasons having to do with social utility (more
African-Americans in the police department would enable it better to
serve the community, more female professors in the classroom would
inspire young women to greater achievements). Critics of preferences
retorted by pointing to the law. And well they should, since the text
of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 seemed a solid anchor even if general
principle proved elusive. Title VI of the Act promised that
“[n]o person…shall, on the ground of race, color, or
national origin, be excluded from participation in, be denied the
benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any program or
activity receiving Federal financial
 assistance.”[7]
 Title VII similarly prohibited
all employment practices that discriminated on the basis of race,
gender, religion, or national
 origin.[8]



In face of the plain language of Titles VI and VII, how did
preferential hiring and promotion ever arise in the first place? How
could they be justified legally? Part of the answer lies in the meaning
of “discrimination.” The Civil Rights Act did not define
the term. The federal courts had to do that job themselves, and the
cases before them drove the definition in a particular direction. Many
factories and businesses prior to 1964, especially in the South, had
in place overtly discriminatory policies and rules. For example, a
company’s policy might have openly relegated African-Americans to the
maintenance department and channeled whites into operations, sales,
and management departments, where the pay and opportunities for
advancement were far better. If, after passage of the Civil Rights
Act, the company willingly abandoned its openly segregative policy,
it could still carry forward the effects of its past segregation
through other already-existing facially neutral rules. For example, a
company policy that required workers to give up their seniority
in one department if they transferred to another would have locked in
place older African-American maintenance workers as effectively as the
company’s own prior segregative rule that made them ineligible to transfer
at all. Consequently, courts began striking down facially neutral
rules that carried through the effects of an employer’s past
discrimination, regardless of the original intent or provenance of the
rules. “Intent” was effectively decoupled from
“discrimination.” In 1971, the Supreme Court ratified this
process, giving the following
construction of Title VII:


The objective of Congress in the enactment of Title VII…was
to achieve equality of employment opportunities and remove barriers
that have operated in the past to favor an identifiable group of white
employees over other employees. Under the Act, practices, procedures,
or tests neutral on their face, and even neutral in terms of intent,
cannot be maintained if they operate to “freeze” the status
quo of prior discriminatory employment practices.


What is required by Congress is the removal of artificial,
arbitrary, and unnecessary barriers to employment when the barriers
operate invidiously to exclude on the basis of racial or other
impermissible
 classification.[9]




In a few short paragraphs the Court advanced from proscribing
practices that froze in place the effects of a firm’s own past
discrimination to proscribing practices that carried through the
effects of past discrimination generally. The Court characterized
statutory discrimination as any exclusionary practice not necessary
to an institution’s activities. Since many practices in most
institutions were likely to be exclusionary, rejecting minorities and
women in greater proportion than white men, all institutions needed to
reassess the full range of their practices to look for, and correct,
discriminatory effect. Against this backdrop, the generic idea of
affirmative action took form:


Each institution should effectively monitor its practices for
exclusionary effect and revise those that cannot be defended as
“necessary” to doing business. In order to make its
monitoring and revising effective, an institution ought to predict, as
best it can, how many minorities and women it would select over time,
were it successfully nondiscriminating. These predictions constitute
the institution’s affirmative action “goals,” and failure
to meet the goals signals to the institution (and to the government)
that it needs to revisit its efforts at eliminating exclusionary 
practices. There may still remain practices that ought to be modified or
 eliminated.[10]



The point of such affirmative action: to induce change in institutions
so that they could comply with the nondiscrimination mandate of the
Civil Rights Act.


However, suppose this self-monitoring and revising fell short? In
early litigation under the Civil Rights Act, courts concluded that some
institutions, because of their histories of exclusion and
their continuing failure to find qualified women or minorities, needed
stronger medicine. Courts ordered these institutions to adopt
“quotas,” to take in specific numbers of formerly excluded
groups on the assumption that once these new workers were securely
lodged in place, the institutions would adapt to this new
 reality.[11]


Throughout the 1970s, courts and government enforcement agencies
extended this idea across the board, requiring a wide range of firms
and organizations—from AT&T to the Alabama Highway
Patrol—temporarily to select by the numbers. In all these cases,
the use of preferences was tied to a single purpose: to prevent
ongoing and future discrimination. Courts carved out this
justification for preferences not through caprice but through
necessity. They found themselves confronted with a practical dilemma
that Congress had never envisaged and thus never addressed when it
wrote the Civil Rights Act.  The dilemma was this: courts could impose
racial preferences to change foot-dragging or inept defendants (and by
doing so apparently transgress the plain prohibition in Title VII) or
they could order less onerous steps they knew would be ineffective,
thus letting discrimination continue (and by doing so violate their
duty under Title VII). Reasonably enough, the federal courts resolved
this dilemma by appeal to the broad purposes of the Civil Rights Act
and justified racial preferences where needed to prevent ongoing and
future
 discrimination.[12]


Thus, preferential affirmative action in the workplace served the
same rationale as the non-preferential sort. Its purpose was
not to compensate for past wrongs, offset unfair advantage,
appropriately reward the deserving, or yield a variety
of social goods; its purpose was to change institutions so they could
comply with the nondiscrimination mandate of the Civil Rights Act.
5. Real-World Affirmative Action: The University


In the 1970s, while campuses were embroiled in debate about how to
increase African-Americans and women on the faculty, universities were
also putting into effect schemes to increase minority presence within
the student body. Very selective universities, in particular, needed
new initiatives because only a handful of African-American and
Hispanic high school students possessed test scores and grades good
enough to make them eligible for admission. These institutions faced a
choice: retain their admissions criteria unchanged and live with the
upshot—hardly any African-Americans and Hispanics on
campus—or fiddle with their criteria to get a more substantial
representation. Most elected the second path.


The Medical School of the University of California at Davis
exemplified a particularly aggressive approach. It reserved sixteen of
the one hundred slots in its entering classes for minorities. In 1973
and again in 1974, Allan Bakke, a white applicant, was denied
admission although his test scores and grades were better than most or
all of those admitted through the special program. He sued. In 1977,
his case, Regents of the University of California v. Bakke,
reached the Supreme Court. The Court rendered its decision a year
 later (438 U.S. 265 [1978]).[13]


An attentive reader of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act might have
thought this case was an easy call. So, too, thought four justices on
the Supreme Court, who voted to order Bakke admitted to the Medical
School. Led by Justice Stevens, they saw the racially segregated,
two-track scheme at the Medical School (a recipient of federal funds)
as a clear violation of the plain language of the Title.


Four other members of the Court, led by Justice Brennan, wanted very
keenly to save the Medical School program. To find a more attractive
terrain for doing battle, they made an end-run around Title VI, arguing
that, whatever its language, it had no independent meaning itself. It
meant in regard to race only what the Constitution
 meant.[14]
 Thus,
instead of having to parse the stingy and unyielding language of Title
VI (“no person shall be subjected to…on the ground of
race”), the Brennan group could turn their creative energies to
interpreting the broad and vague language of the Fourteenth Amendment
(“no person shall be denied the equal protection of the
laws”), which provided much more wiggle-room for justifying
racial preferences. The Brennan justices persuaded one other member,
Justice Powell, to join them in their view of Title VI. But Powell
didn’t agree with their view of the Constitution. He argued that the
Medical School’s policy was unconstitutional and voted that Bakke must
be admitted. His vote, added to the four votes of the Stevens group,
meant that Allan Bakke won his case and that Powell got to write the
opinion of the Court. The Brennan strategy didn’t reap the fruit it
intended.


Against the leanings of the Brennan group, who would distinguish
between “benign” and “malign” uses of race and
deal more leniently with the former, Powell insisted that the
Fourteenth Amendment’s promise of “equal protection of the
law” must mean the same thing for all, black and white alike. To
paraphrase Powell:


The Constitution can tolerate no “two-class” theory of
equal protection. There is no principled basis for deciding between
classes that deserve special judicial attention and those that don’t.
To think otherwise would involve the Court in making all kinds of
“political” decisions it is not competent to make. In
expounding the Constitution, the Court’s role is to discern
“principles sufficiently absolute to give them roots throughout
the community and continuity over significant periods of time, and to
lift them above the pragmatic political judgments of a particular time
and place” (Bakke, at 295–300 [Powell quoting Cox 1976,
114]).




What, then, was the practical meaning of a “sufficiently
absolute” rendering of the principle of equal protection? It was
this: when the decisions of state agents ‘touch upon an
individual’s race or ethnic background, he is entitled to a judicial
determination that the burden he is asked to bear on that basis is
precisely tailored to serve a compelling governmental
 interest (Bakke, at 300).




Powell, with this standard in hand, then turned to look at the four
reasons the Medical School offered for its special program: (i) to
reduce “the historic deficit of traditionally disfavored
minorities in medical schools and the medical profession;” (ii)
to counter “the effects of societal discrimination;” (iii)
to increase “the number of physicians who will practice in
communities currently underserved;” and (iv) to obtain “the
educational benefits that flow from an ethnically diverse student
 body” (Bakke, at 307). Did any or all of them specify a
compelling governmental interest? Did they necessitate use of racial
preferences?


As to the first reason, Powell dismissed it out of hand.


If [the School’s] purpose is to assure within its student body some
specified percentage of a particular group merely because of its race
or ethnic origin, such a preferential purpose must be rejected not as
insubstantial but as facially invalid. Preferring members of any one
group for no reason other than race or ethnic origin is discrimination
for its own sake.


As to the second reason, Powell allowed it more force. A state has a
legitimate interest in ameliorating the effects of past discrimination.
Even so, contended Powell, the Court,


has never approved a classification that aids persons perceived as
members of relatively victimized groups at the expense of other
innocent individuals in the absence of judicial, legislative, or
administrative findings of constitutional or statutory
 violations (Bakke, at 308).



And the Medical School does not purport to have made, and is in no
position to make, such findings. Its broad mission is education, not
the formulation of any legislative policy or the adjudication of
particular claims of illegality.…[I]solated segments of our vast
governmental structures are not competent to make those decisions, at
least in the absence of legislative mandates and legislatively
determined criteria (Bakke, at 309).



As to the third reason, Powell found it, too, insufficient. The
Medical School provided no evidence that the best way it could
contribute to increased medical services to underserved communities was
to employ a racially preferential admissions scheme. Indeed, the
Medical School provided no evidence that its scheme would result in any
benefits at all to such
 communities (Bakke, at 311).


This left the fourth reason. Here Powell found merit. A university’s
interest in a diverse student body is legitimated by the First
Amendment’s implied protection of academic freedom. This constitutional
halo makes the interest “compelling.” However, the Medical
School’s use of a racial and ethnic classification scheme was not
“precisely tailored” to effect the School’s interest in
diversity, argued Powell.


The diversity that furthers a compelling state interest encompasses
a far broader array of qualifications and characteristics of which
racial or ethnic origin is but a single though important element. [The
Medical School’s] special admissions program, focused solely on ethnic
diversity, would hinder rather than further attainment of genuine
 diversity (Bakke, at 316).




The diversity which provides an educational atmosphere
“conducive to speculation, experiment and creation”
includes a nearly endless range of experiences, talents, and attributes
that students might bring to campus. In reducing diversity to racial
and ethnic quotas, the Medical School wholly misconceived this
important educational interest.


In sum, although the last of the Medical School’s four reasons
encompassed a “compelling governmental interest,” the
School’s special admissions program was not necessary to effect the
interest. The special admissions program was unconstitutional. So
concluded Justice Powell.
6. Equality’s Rule


This was a conclusion Justice Brennan tried vigorously to forestall.
Brennan agreed with Powell that “equal protection” must
mean the same thing—that is, remain one rule—whether
applied to blacks or whites. But the same rule applied to different
circumstances need not yield the same results. Racial preferences
created for different reasons and producing different outcomes need not
all be judged in the same harsh, virtually fatal, manner. This point
was the crux of Brennan’s defense of the Medical School’s policy.


Powell thought there was no principled way to distinguish
“benign” from “malign” discrimination, but
Brennan insisted there was. He argued that if the Court looked
carefully at its past cases striking down Jim Crow laws, it would see
the principle at work. What the Court found wrong in Jim Crow was that
it served no purpose except to mark out and stigmatize one group of
people as inferior. The “cardinal principle” operating in
the Court’s decisions condemned racial classifications “drawn on
the presumption that one race is inferior to another” or that
“put the weight of government behind racial hatred and
 separation” (Bakke, at 358 [Brennan, dissenting]).
 Brennan agreed with Powell that no public
racial classification motivated by racial animus, no classification
whose purpose is to stigmatize people with the “badge of
inferiority,” could withstand judicial scrutiny. However, the
Medical School’s policy, even if ill-advised or mistaken, reflected a
public purpose far different from that found in Jim Crow. The policy
ought not be treated as though it were cut from the same cloth.


Brennan granted that if a state adopted a racial classification for
the purpose of humiliating whites, or stigmatizing Allan Bakke as
inferior and confining him to second-class citizenship, that
classification would be as odious as Jim Crow. But the Medical School’s
policy had neither this purpose nor this effect. Allan Bakke may have
been upset and resentful at losing out under the special plan, but he
wasn’t “in any sense stamped as an inferior by the Medical
School’s rejection of him.” Nor did his loss constitute a
“pervasive injury,” in the sense that wherever he went he
would be treated as a “second-class citizen” because of his
 color (Bakke, at 376 [Brennan, dissenting]).


In short, argued Brennan, the principle expressed in the Equal
Protection Clause should be viewed as an anti-caste principle,
a principle that uniformly and consistently rejects all public
law whose purpose is to subject people to an inferior and degraded
station in life, whether they are black or 
 white.[15]
 Of course, given
the asymmetrical position of whites and blacks in our country, we are
not likely to encounter laws that try to stigmatize whites as an
inferior caste (much less succeed at it). But this merely shows that a
principle applied to different circumstances produces different
results. Because the Medical School’s program sought to undo the
effects of a racial caste system long-enduring in America, it
represented a purpose of great social importance and should not be
found Constitutionally infirm: so maintained
 Brennan (Bakke, at 363 [Brennan, dissenting]).


Justice Powell never successfully engaged this way of reading
“constitutional equality.” His insistence on clear, plain,
unitary, absolute principle did not cut against the Brennan view. The
issue between Powell and Brennan was not the consistency and stringency
of the principle but its content. If the Constitution says, “The
state cannot deliberately burden someone by race if its purpose is
to create or maintain caste,” then constitutional law
doesn’t block any of the Medical School’s
 justifications.[16]


If we turn away from exegesis of the Constitution, are we likely to
find in political theory itself any principle of equality implying that
every use of racial preferences in every circumstance
works an intolerable injustice? 

The prospects seem dim. Won’t very general notions of equality
lend themselves to defending affirmative action (and the social
inclusion it effects) as well as condemning it (and the racial
non–neutrality it
 involves)?[17] 
The challenge here is well-illustrated by
Carl Cohen’s most recent effort, in a debate with James Sterba,
to extract a strict prohibition on racial preferences from the
Aristotelian principle that “equals should be treated
equally” (Cohen and Sterba 2003, 23).  This principle, urges
Cohen, “certainly entails at least this: It is wrong, always and
everywhere, to give special advantage to any group simply on the basis
of physical characteristics that have no relevance to the award given
or the burden imposed” (Cohen and Sterba 2003, 25).  Whether
anything interesting follows from this proposition depends on how we
construe “relevance.” Cohen admits that public policy may
rightly treat some people differently because of their physical
characteristics. For example, the state might offer special assistance
to the old or disabled. Now, this example suggests that the relevance
of physical differences is something independent of social policy. Age
and disability, it seems, are real features of persons and public
policy simply tracks them. However, the difference that differences
make is not something itself given by nature; it is determined by
public purposes. Age and disability are made relevant in this
manner—in the one case, by the social purpose of assuring that
people do not have to live in poverty when they can no longer work; in
the other case, by the social purpose of assuring that people are not
foreclosed from developing and marketing their talents by impediments
in the (largely constructed) physical environment. 


Purpose determines relevancy, and this is true whether or not the
relevant differences are physical. If the nation thinks it desirable to change white
institutions so that they are less uniformly white, that purpose links
skin color to recruitment.


Because the Aristotelian principle by itself doesn’t rule out
racial preferences (since blacks and whites may be relevantly
different with respect to certain legitimate public purposes), it is
not surprising that Cohen also invokes a substantive conception of
equality: “All members of humankind are equally ends in themselves,
all have equal dignity—and therefore all are entitled to equal
respect from the community and its laws” (Cohen and Sterba 2003,
24). This principle, however, brings us back to the interpretive
questions about “equal protection of the laws” played out in the
Powell-Brennan exchange in Bakke. By Justice Brennan’s lights,
Allen Bakke’s basic dignity was not violated. The Medical
School’s two-track policy that resulted in Bakke’s
rejection did not, by intent or effect, stigmatize him as inferior, or
mark him off as a member of a despised caste, or turn him into a
second-class citizen. Bakke arguably had to bear a particular burden
because of his race but the burden was not significantly different
objectively from others that public policy might have thrown his
way. If the Medical School had reserved sixteen of its seats for
applicants from economically deprived backgrounds, no one would have
suggested that it had violated the equal protection clause of the
Fourteenth Amendment. Yet under this hypothetical policy Allan Bakke
could have lost out as well—lost out to low-income applicants
whose college grades and MCAT scores were inferior to his own. Allen
Bakke may have felt aggrieved at losing out under the Medical
School’s policy of racial preferences, but it is not enough to
show that those who lose out under some public scheme feel offended or
disgruntled. Cohen needs to specify a conception of dignity in which
bearing unequal burdens on behalf of urgent social ends invariably
amounts to an assault on dignity if the burdens happen to be assigned
by race. This specification remains unfinished in his work so far.

7. Diversity’s Dominion


How, if it held the Medical School’s policy unconstitutional, did
Justice Powell’s Bakke opinion become the basis upon which
universities across the land enacted—or
maintained—racially preferential admissions policies?


If Powell had concluded with his assessment of the Medical School’s
four justifications, Bakke would have left university
affirmative action in a precarious situation. However, he didn’t stop
there. In an earlier ruling on Bakke’s lawsuit, the California Supreme
Court had forbidden the Medical School to make any use of race or
ethnicity in its admissions decisions. Powell thought this went too
far. Given higher education’s protected interest in
“diversity,” and given that a student’s race or ethnicity
might add to diversity just in the same way that her age, work
experience, family background, special talents, foreign language
fluency, athletic prowess, military service, and unusual
accomplishments might, Powell vacated that portion of the California
Supreme Court’s order.


Then he added some dicta for guidance. If universities want to
understand diversity and the role that race and ethnicity might play in
achieving it, they should look to Harvard, proposed Powell, and he
appended to his opinion a long statement of Harvard’s affirmative action program.
In such a program, Powell contended, racial or ethnic background
might


be deemed a “plus” in a particular applicant’s file, yet
it does not insulate the individual from comparison with all other
candidates for the available seats.…This kind of program treats
each applicant as an individual in the admissions process. The
applicant who loses out on the last available seat to another candidate
receiving a “plus” on the basis of ethnic background will
not have been foreclosed from all consideration for that seat simply
because he was not the right color or had the wrong surname. It would
mean only that his combined qualifications…did not outweigh
those of the other applicant. His qualifications would have been
weighed fairly and competitively, and he would have had no basis to
complain of unequal treatment under the Fourteenth
 Amendment (Bakke, at 318, 319).



In these off-hand comments, universities saw a green light for pushing
ahead aggressively with their affirmative action programs.  Justice
Powell’s basic holding could not have been plainer: any system like
the Medical School’s that assessed applications along two different
tracks defined by race or that used numerical racial quotas must fail
constitutional muster. Yet by the mid-1980s universities across the
land had in place systems of admissions and scholarships that
exhibited one or both of these features. When the University of
Maryland’s Banneker scholarships—awarded only to
African-American students—were held in violation of the
Constitution in 1994, the house of cards forming university
affirmative action began to
 fall.[18]
 In 1996, the Court of Appeals for
the Fifth Circuit struck down the University of Texas Law School’s two-track
admissions program.
 In 1998, the Court of Appeals for the First Circuit struck down a Boston plan
assigning students to selective high schools by
 race.[19]
 In 2001, two more schools saw their admissions programs invalidated
by federal courts: the University of
 Georgia[20]
 and the University of Michigan Law
 School.[21]
 In many of these cases, educational
institutions were using schemes that made race something very much more than
Justice Powell’s “plus”
 factor.[22]
 The Fifth Circuit Court’s ruling in the University of Texas case (Hopwood
v. Texas, 78 F 3d 932 [Fifth Circuit, 1996]) threw a cloud
even over this small window for affirmative action, boldly asserting
that the Bakke holding was now dead as law and that race
could not be used at all in admissions.


Given Justice Powell’s singular opinion, supported by no one else on
the Court, and given the drift of Supreme Court decisions on racial
preferences since
 1978,[23]
 the Hopwood court was not
outlandish, if a bit presumptuous, in declaring Powell’s holding in
Bakke dead. As it happened, Powell’s opinion was far from dead.
In the University of Michigan Law School case, Grutter v.
Bollinger, eventually decided by the Supreme Court in June 2003,
Justice Sandra Day O’Connor’s lead opinion declared: “today we
endorse Justice Powell’s view that student body diversity is a
compelling state interest that can justify the use of race in
university admissions” (Grutter v. Bollinger, 539
U.S. 306 [2003], at 330).  Diversity was alive after all. But how it
worked its affirmative action elixir remained as unclear in 2003 as it
had been in 1978.


To see why, consider how in Grutter Justice
O’Connor posed the issue:


The [Law School’s] policy aspires to “achieve that
diversity which has the potential to enrich everyone’s education
and thus make a law class stronger than the sum of its
parts.”…The policy does not restrict the types of
diversity contributions eligible for substantial weight in the
admissions process, but instead recognizes “many possible bases
for diversity admissions.”…The policy does, however,
reaffirm the Law School’s longstanding commitment to “one
particular type of diversity,” that is, “racial and ethnic
diversity with special reference to the inclusion of students from
groups which have been historically discriminated against”
(Grutter, at 325).




Now, posing the issue this way and allowing the Law School to assert a
special interest in “one particular type of diversity”
invites the conflation of general diversity—a diversity
of opinions, experiences, backgrounds, talents, aspirations, and
perspectives—with ethnic and racial diversity
that Justice Powell appeared strongly to resist. After all, the
Medical School too had asserted in its defense a similar special
interest.


Recall Justice Powell’s principal objection to the Medical School’s
set-asides. In making the race or ethnicity of an applicant a
“plus,” a scheme like Harvard’s does


not insulate the individual from comparison with all other candidates
for the available seats. The file of a particular African-American
applicant may be examined for his potential contribution to diversity
without the factor of race being decisive when compared, for example,
with that of an applicant identified as an Italian-American if the
latter is thought to exhibit qualities more likely to promote
beneficial educational pluralism.…In short, an admissions
program operated in this way is flexible enough to consider all
pertinent elements of diversity in light of the particular
qualifications of each applicant…. This kind of program treats
each applicant as an individual in the admissions
 process (Bakke, at 318–19).




By contrast, Allan Bakke was not able to compete for all one hundred
seats at the Medical School; sixteen were reserved for candidates not
like him.


It is Powell’s resistance to this reservation that underpins Justice
O’Connor’s opinion in Grutter, where she observed:


We find that the Law School’s admissions program bears the hallmark
of a narrowly tailored plan. As Justice Powell made clear in
Bakke, truly individualized consideration demands that race be
used in a flexible, non-mechanical way. It follows from this mandate
that universities cannot establish quotas for members of certain racial
 groups (Grutter, at 337).




What vindicated the Law School in O’Connor’s eyes was its
“highly individualized, holistic review of each applicant’s file,
giving serious consideration to all the ways an applicant might
contribute to a diverse educational
environment” (Grutter, at
 339).[24]
 This “individualized consideration” is crucial; in
Gratz v.  Bollinger, decided the same day as
Grutter, Justice O’Connor switched sides to hold
unconstitutional the undergraduate admissions process at the
University of Michigan. The undergraduate admissions office operated
differently than the Law School. It computed an index score for each
applicant by assigning numerical points for academic factors such as
high school grades, admissions test scores, quality of high school,
strength of curriculum; and for nonacademic factors such as being a
resident of Michigan, a child of an alumnus, a recruited athlete, or a
member of “an underrepresented minority group.” An
applicant falling in this last category automatically received 20
 points (Gratz v. Bollinger,
539 U. S. 244 [2003], at 287).
 In O’Connor’s view, this “mechanical” procedure meant
that the undergraduate admissions office did not fully take account in
each application “of all factors that may contribute to student
body
 diversity” (Gratz, at 288).
 


But O’Connor’s conclusion here simply draws us back to the lacuna in
Justice Powell’s Bakke opinion. Why should the undergraduate
admissions office take account of all the factors that may
contribute to student body diversity if it especially wants to select
from certain parts of the diversity spectrum? Why can’t it, like the
Law School, claim a special interest in “one particular type of
diversity”? Why bar the undergraduate admissions office from
using an effective tool to promote its interest even if the tool is
“mechanical”? In fact, the Law School’s
“non-mechanical” procedure differed from the undergraduate
admissions policy only on its face, not in its results. During
admissions season, the Law School’s director of admissions frequently
consulted the “daily reports” that “kept track of
the racial and ethnic composition” of the incoming class. He did
so to make sure a “critical mass” of minority students was
 included (Grutter, at 326).
 In short, the Law School
“managed” its admissions process so that roughly 6 to 7
percent of each entering class was African-American. The undergraduate
admissions procedure, with its index scores, yielded a similar
 outcome (Grutter, at 367–69 [Rehnquist, dissenting] and 374 [Kennedy,
dissenting]).
 Only surface appearance distinguished the
two procedures. Justice Scalia called
the Law School’s “holistic” admissions process “a
sham,” and not without
 reason (Grutter, at 375 [Scalia, dissenting]).


As it turned out, Grutter failed to close the book on
university affirmative action. A new legal challenge soon arose, this
time against the University of Texas, which had revised its own
admission program in 2004 to emulate the scheme validated
in Grutter. The case, Fisher v. Texas, wound its way
through the courts for a decade, twice landing on the steps of the
Supreme Court before final disposition in 2016.

Justice Kennedy, writing for the Court, left the Grutter
defense of racial preferences intact, essentially retracing Justice
O’Connor’s opinion. Universities bent upon pursuing the
“educational benefits that flow from student body
diversity,” he wrote, are due a degree of judicial deference
(Fisher v. University of Texas, 133 S. Ct. 2411, 2419
[2013]).


The University explains that it strives to provide an ‘academic
environment’ that offers a ‘robust exchange of ideas,
exposure to differing cultures, preparation for the challenges of an
increasingly diverse workforce, and acquisition of competencies
required of future leaders.’ … All of these
objectives … mirror the ‘compelling interest’ this
Court has approved in its prior cases (Fisher v. University of
Texas, 136 S. Ct. 2198, 2211 [2016]).



Persuaded that race–neutral policies didn’t allow the
University fully to succeed in deriving the “educational
benefits” of diversity, the Court majority found the
University’s modest use of race permissible. 


But despite these legal victories, have universities actually made a
case for diversity as the justifying basis for race–conscious
admissions? Caught napping in the mid–1990s when the legal
challenges began, higher education rushed to put meat on
the Bakke bones and turn Justice Powell’s
off–hand remarks into a full–fledged defense. As the
University of Michigan cases approached a final test in 2003, the
Supreme Court was bombarded with scores of
friend–of–the–court briefs from business groups,
military officers, higher education associations, coteries of
scholars, and other interested parties lauding the benefits of
diversity. A similar outpouring preceded the two decisions
in Fisher v. University of
Texas.[25]

Consider some of the claims in these briefs. “[S]tudent body
diversity is essential” if universities are to provide
students with “skills necessary for…success in an
increasingly globalized world” (Leading Public Research
Universities 2015, 11–12; emphasis added). Racial and ethnic
diversity on campus are vital to securing a capable
workforce; it is  essential that [students] be educated in an
environment where they are exposed to diverse people, ideas,
perspectives, and interactions (65 Leading American Businesses 2003,
1, 2; emphasis added). Otherwise, the education of students is
“degraded” (823 Social Scientists 2015, 5;
emphasis added). “[S]tudents today must receive direct
experience with people of different backgrounds” (American
Council on Education 2015, 6; emphasis added). The
“only means of obtaining properly qualified employees
is through diversity at institutions of higher
education…[Appropriate] skills can only be developed
through exposure to widely diverse people, culture, ideas, and
viewpoints” (Fortune 100 and Other Leading Businesses 2013, 3,
5; emphasis added). “Diversity is an indispensable
prerequisite to establishing the most productive problem–solving
groups” (Social and Organizational Psychologists 2015, 47;
emphasis added).


According to the briefs the positive effects of diversity are
bountiful. They include “improvements in cognitive abilities,
analytical problem solving skills and complex thinking
skills…[C]ross racial interactions are more strongly linked
with cognitive growth than are interactions with non–racial
diversity” (American Educational Research Association 2012,
12). “[R]esearch shows that by increasing diversity, universities can
help their graduates enter society with better problem–solving
capabilities than students who are not exposed to diversity” (Social
and Organizational Psychologists 2015, 37). 

Now consider four points. First, the promiscuous use of “diversity” in
the argument for affirmative action opens the door to waffling and
equivocation. Students learn through “exposure to widely diverse
people, culture, ideas, and viewpoints” announces the Fortune 100
brief. Of course. But the issue at hand is racial
diversity. Wrapping the latter into the former is not an aid to
precision.[26]
Second, can we imagine that the University of Michigan or the
University of Texas would abandon its affirmative action program if
studies showed no particular educational benefit to diversity? Suppose
it turns out that students in general don’t show additional “cognitive
growth” from increased racial diversity. Suppose it turns out students
would best prepare for our “increasingly globalized world” by learning
Mandarin Chinese or Spanish.

Third, the straining by academics to show that cross-racial
interaction
is essential, indispensable, vital, necessary,
or imperative to a good education, if taken at face value,
leads to an unpleasant conclusion, namely that a lot of black college
students suffer a deficient education. The young woman who excels at
Dunbar High School in Washington, DC (enrollment 95 % black, 1 %
white) and then gets her Bachelor of Science degree in
statistics magna cum laude at Spelman College (enrolling, in
2017, one white among its 2097 students) is, according to Fortune 100
companies, not the sort of employee they want. Graduates of Fisk
University (0.7% white) or Tougaloo (0.6% white) or Florida A & M
(3.5% white) haven’t achieved enough cognitive growth,
haven’t sufficiently honed their problem–solving
skills—is that what we are supposed to conclude? The University
of Texas (enrolling 25% Hispanics and 5% blacks) contends that without
a “critical mass” of minority students it can’t reap
“the educational benefits of diversity.” Does this mean
that Prairie View University, two hours down the road from Austin and
enrolling 7% Hispanics and 1.8% whites, has to do without those
benefits? Are its students poorly prepared for “our increasingly
diverse workforce and society” (Fisher 2016, at 2210,
2211)? Defenders of affirmative action should think twice about
claiming an education in a “non–diverse” setting
must be degraded. 

Fourth, there is a noticeable lack of “fit” between university
affirmative action practices and the diversity rationale (see, for
example, Anderson 2002, 27; Anderson 2004, 1217, 1221; Anderson 2010,
142–143). Race is not treated just like any other special factor
that might warrant an admission “plus.” Universities work diligently
to maintain a relatively constant percentage of black and Hispanic
enrollees but give variable attention to other of the myriad qualities
students can bring to campus. As one proponent of affirmative action
notes, “affirmative action programs…do not look or operate as
if they were testing for ‘diversity’.” He suggests that many
supporters of affirmative action nevertheless disregard this fact,
believing “that there is no harm in [a] miscast reliance on diversity
because, with a wink and a nod, everyone understands that diversity is
really a proxy for integration” (Issacharoff 2002, 30, 34;
emphasis added). 
8. The Integration Argument


Although the University couched its legal defense in terms of the
“educational benefits of diversity,” another rationale lay ready at
hand. The main reason the University of Michigan strives for a
reasonable representation of minorities on campus is because of the
way it conceives of its mission: to prepare Michigan’s future
leaders.


The argument is straightforward:

The leadership of the state ought roughly to represent the state’s
population, ethnically and racially.
As the state’s premier training ground for leadership, the
University ought to graduate rising generations of future leaders that
conform to this representational goal.
To graduate such rising generations, it needs to admit racially and
ethnically representative classes.



This is the “Michigan Mandate” (Gratz
v. Bollinger, 135 F. Supp. 2d 790 [2001], at 796–797).
Racial and ethnic diversity aren’t incidental contributors to a
distinct academic mission; they are part of the mission of
the University, just as educating young people from Michigan is part
of it (see Fullinwider and Lichtenberg 2004, 165–188). And
something like a national version of the mandate underlies the
Michigan Law School’s affirmative action policy, since its
graduates move into elite law firms or government service outside
Michigan (see Lempert et al. 2000, 399; Wilkins 2000,
530–534).


This “integration” rationale seems better aligned with the
actual practice of university affirmative action than the diversity
rationale. Indeed, in the midst of her nominally Powell-like defense
of the Law School, Justice O’Connor in Grutter for a
moment veered away from the “educational benefits of
diversity” to go down a quite different path. Institutions like
the University of Michigan and its Law School, she noted,
“represent the training ground for…our Nation’s
leaders.” She went on:


In order to cultivate a set of leaders with legitimacy in the eyes
of the citizenry, it is necessary that the path to leadership be
visibly open to talented and qualified individuals of every race and
ethnicity. All members of our heterogeneous society must have
confidence in the openness and integrity of the educational
institutions that provide this training.…Access…must be
inclusive…of every race and ethnicity, so that all members of
our heterogeneous society may participate in the educational
institutions that provide the training and education necessary to
succeed in
 America (Grutter, at 336).




This “legitimacy” argument—not in any way about
enriching the climate of opinion on campus or improving
students’ complex thinking skills—parallels the simple
syllogism set out just above. Justice O’Connor inserted this new
rationale into the middle of her Grutter
opinion—inserted it unexpectedly and then abandoned it just as
quickly to resume tracing the byways of diversity. Justice Kennedy did
the same in Fisher (2016, 2211).  


Certainly, something in the spirit of the “Michigan
Mandate” has animated elite universities, including those
studied by William Bowen and Derek Bok in The Shape of the River:
Long-Term Consequences of Considering Race in College and University
Admissions. The primary aim of these institutions is not through
vigorous affirmative action to enhance the liberal learning of their
students (although they welcome this gain for all students). Their
main motive for assuring that the percentage of African-Americans and
Hispanics on their campuses is more than token derives from their
self-conceptions as institutions training individuals who will some
day take up national and international leadership roles in the
professions, arts, sciences, education, politics, and government
(Bowen and Bok 1998, 7).  Society, they believe, will be stronger and
more just if the ranks of its leading citizens include a racially and
ethnically broader range of people than it does now. Nor are they
wrong in thinking that the pipeline to local and national elites runs
through top-notch universities.


Elizabeth Anderson, in two long essays (2002, 2004), bookending
the Grutter decision, makes a thorough and cogent case for
putting racial integration at the center of conceptions of affirmative
action. The diversity argument is insufficient, she
writes. “Considered as a purely cognitive end, divorced from the
values of democracy and social justice, the ‘robust exchange of
ideas’ cannot support the scope of racial preferences in college
admissions” (Anderson 2002, 1221). She goes on:


The integrative model of affirmative action offers an alternative
rationale for race–sensitive admissions that unites educational
with democratic and social justice concerns. It begins with a
recognition that Americans live in a profoundly segregated society, a
condition inconsistent with a fully democratic society and with equal
opportunity. To achieve the latter goals, we need to
desegregate—to integrate, that is—to live together as one
body of equal citizens (Anderson 2002, 1222).



The integrative model has several legal advantages over the diversity
and compensation models of affirmative action. It makes sense of the
scope and weight that educational institutions actually give to race
in the admissions process. It thus closes the gap between theory and
practice that makes affirmative action programs so vulnerable under
strict scrutiny. It also shows how race can be directly relevant to a
compelling state interest, rather than merely a proxy for something
else, such as diversity of opinions (Anderson 2002, 1226).



Given the realities of race in the U.S., people of different races
occupy different walks of life. So in the U.S., democracy requires
racial integration of the main institutions of civil society, the
places where discussion of public import among citizens take place:
public accommodations, workplaces, schools, and neighborhoods. The
same point applies to society’s elites, those who play a pivotal
role in formulating and adopting policies of public import. Elites, to
be legitimate, must serve a representative function: they must be
capable of and dedicated to representing the concerns of people from
all walks of life, so that the policies they forge are responsive to
these concerns. An elite drawn only from segments of society that live
in isolation from other segments will be ignorant of the circumstances
and concerns of those who occupy other walks of life (Anderson 2004,
22).



Anderson sees integration as an end courts can accept, one that
informs many past judicial opinions and acts of legislation, and one
given endorsement in Grutter:

The “diversity” defense of affirmative action, articulated
in Justice Powell’s Bakke opinion, limits integration
to those cases in which it can be shown to yield educational
benefits. Grutter advances a more robust integrationist
perspective, which affirms racial integration as a compelling interest
apart rom its educational benefits (Anderson 2004, 23).


(It is hard to see how Grutter represents a
“robust” defense of integrative affirmative
action. Justice O’Connor introduced the “legitimacy”
argument without prior preparation and left it hanging without further
development. Justice Kennedy in Fisher likewise seemed not to
notice that the “legitimacy” argument departs considerably
from the diversity rationale he was rehearsing. Nevertheless, there it
is in the majority opinions, to be seized on and developed by a future
court if it is so disposed.)[27] 
 
Other writers, too, have talked about affirmative action in terms
of integration (Warnke 1998; Estlund 2002; Jacobs 2004; Boddie
2016). 


The integration argument, like the diversity argument, is
straightforwardly instrumental. It points to hoped-for outcomes of
affirmative action. If those outcomes don’t materialize, then
affirmative action’s cause is weakened. Moreover, the little
integration syllogism isn’t complete as it stands. It needs to include
another premise: that the gains from achieving racially and ethnically
integrated classes don’t come at a disproportionate cost.


Perhaps the cost is high, or even too high. Stephan and Abigail
Thernstrom certainly think so. They contend that most of the cost
falls on the very persons affirmative action is supposed to benefit.
Under-prepared African-Americans are thrown into academic environments
where they cannot succeed (Thernstrom and Thernstrom 1997, 395–411).
In the Thernstroms’ view, race-blind admissions policies will result
in a desirable “cascading,” with African-American and
Hispanic students ending up at colleges and universities where the
academic credentials of their fellow students match their
own. However, the Bowen and Bok study provides some evidence that
cascading isn’t necessarily a valuable phenomenon. In fact, at the
schools they studied, the better the institution a student entered,
whatever his academic credentials, the more likely he was to graduate,
go on to further education, and earn a good
income (Bowen and Bok 1998, 63, 114,
 144).


Even so, the select schools Bowen and Bok studied may be quite
unrepresentative of the full range of schools that
resort to racial preferences and the cost-benefit picture that holds
for these schools may not hold for the rest. Indeed, the picture drawn
by Richard Sander in a lengthy review of affirmative action in law
schools, published in the November 2004 Stanford Law Review,
lends credence to the Thernstrom’s academic mismatch thesis. Ranking
law schools from best to worst, Sander found that affirmative action
boosts African-American students 20 or more steps up the ladder,
putting them in schools with white classmates who possess considerably
better LSAT scores and undergraduate college grades.  The upshot:
“close to half of black students end up in the bottom tenth of
their classes.” This bad performance yields three bad
consequences.  First, African-American students suffer high attrition
rates.  Second, they fail the bar exam at a high rate (the principal
predictor of a student’s passing or failing is her grades, not the
quality of her school).  Third, they suffer a significant employment
penalty for low grades “in all schools outside the top
ten.” Sander estimates that under a race-blind admissions
system, American law schools would actually create more
African-American lawyers than they do under affirmative action (Sander
2004, 449, 460, 478, 479).


Sander’s article inspired a flurry of responses disputing his
methodology and conclusions (e.g., Ayers and Brooks 2005, Chambers,
et al. 2005, Wilkins 2005, Ho 2005, Barnes 2007, and
Rothstein and Yoon 2008).  Sander replied to his critics (Sander
2005); other writers found evidence of mismatch effects in educational
domains outside law schools (Elliott et al. 1996, Smith and
McArdle, 2004, Arcidiacono et al. 2012); yet other scholars
presented independent confirmation of Sander’s hypothesis
(Arcidiacono et al. 2011b, Williams 2013), One critic, upon
re-analysis, had to withdraw her refutation of Sander (Barnes 2007,
Barnes 2011); and in 2012 Sander joined with co-author Stuart Taylor
to publish Mismatch, a book-length treatment setting out old
and new research supporting Sander’s hypothesis. Others continue
to find the law school mismatch hypothesis dubious and unsupported
(Camilli and Welner 2011; Camilli and Jackson 2011; Kidder and Lempert
2015) 

Other researchers, following the lead of Bowen and Bok, have focused
on undergraduate performance. Fischer and Massey, for example,
concluded that though affirmative action has “both positive and
negative implications for minority students, [such policies] operate,
on balance, to enhance the academic achievement of minority
students” (Fischer and Massey 2007, 546). In another study,
Massey and Mooney found “little support for the mismatch
hypothesis” (Massey and Mooney 2007, 114). Dale and Krueger
determined that “the effect of attending a school with a higher
average SAT score is positive for black and Hispanic students”
(Dale and Krueger 2014, 350). Similarly, Melguizo held: 

that for minority students who were admitted to…selective
institutions under affirmative action (i.e., with slightly
below–average SAT scores but with other personal characteristics
and experiences correlated with persistence), their probability of
graduation was not lower as was predicted by critics of affirmative
action. On the contrary, their probability of graduation was higher at
the most and very selective institutions compared to the
non–selective ones (Melguizo 2008, 233).




One reason disputes persist about cause and effect is imperfect
data. Although often operating with large sets of information,
researchers must decide which statistical models most appropriately
tease out significance, decisions that involve debatable assumptions
about filling in missing pieces. Two researchers note that
“[b]etter data would undoubtedly permit more relevant and
convincing analyses of the effects of mismatch and and would
especially help to identify any threshold below which potential
mismatch effects become more probable” (Camilli and Welner 2011,
500). Much of the back–and–forth about the effects of
affirmative action could be resolved if educational institutions
disclosed information about their admissions processes, student
grades, graduation rates, and the like. But institutional resistance
makes this unlikely.[28] 
9. Desert Confounded, Desert Misapplied


The affirmative action debate throws up many ironies but one in
particular should be noted. From the time in 1973 when Judith Jarvis
Thomson conjectured that it was “not entirely
inappropriate” that white males bear the costs of the
community’s “making amends” to African-Americans and women
through preferential affirmative action, the affirmative action debate
has been distracted by intense quarrels over who deserves
what. Do the beneficiaries of affirmative action deserve
their benefits (Allen 2011)? Do the losers deserve their loss?


Christopher Edley, the White House assistant put in charge of
President Clinton’s review of affirmative action policy in 1994–95,
speaks of how, during the long sessions he and his co-workers put in
around the conference table, the discussion of affirmative action kept
circling back to the “coal miner’s son” 
 question (I’ve changed the gender for expository purposes).


Imagine a college admissions committee trying to decide between the
white [son] of an Appalachian coal miner’s family and the African
American son of a successful Pittsburgh neurosurgeon. Why should the
black applicant get preference over the white
applicant? (Edley 1996, 132ff)




Why, indeed? This is a hard question if one defends affirmative action
in terms of compensatory or distributive justice. If directly doing
justice is what affirmative action is about, then its mechanisms must
be adjusted as best they can to reward individual desert and true
merit. The “coal miner’s son” example is meant to throw
desert in the defender’s face: here is affirmative action at
work thwarting desert, for surely the coal miner’s son—from the
hard scrabble of Harlan County, say—has lived with far less
advantage than the neurosurgeon’s son who, we may suppose, has reaped
all the advantages of his father’s (or mother’s) standing. Why should
the latter get a preference?


A defender might answer in the way that Charles Lawrence and Mari
Matsuda do in their 1997 book, We Won’t Go Back:
“All the talk about class, the endless citings of the
‘poor white male from Appalachia,’ cannot avoid the
reality of race and gender privilege” (Lawrence and Matsuda
1997, 190–191). As they see it, because white privilege persists
racial preferences really do balance the scales. Because male
privilege persists, gender preferences really do make selections
fairer. Lawrence and Matsuda brook no concession: in every case the
loser in affirmative action is not the more deserving.


Even Justice Brennan tried his hand at this argument, writing in
Bakke:


If it was reasonable to conclude—as we hold that it
was—that the failure of minorities to qualify for admission at
[the University of California at] Davis [Medical School] under regular
procedures was due principally to the effects of past discrimination,
then there is a reasonable likelihood that, but for pervasive racial
discrimination…[Bakke] would have failed to qualify for
admission even in the absence of Davis’ special admissions
 program (Bakke, at 365–6 [Brennen, dissenting]).




Bakke was not denied anything to which he had moral claim in the
first place.



Just as Mary Anne Warren and James Rachels in the 1970s thought that
the losers under affirmative action were losing only illicit
privileges, and the gainers merely gaining what should have been theirs
to start with, so Michel Rosenfeld in the 1990s, in his extended
“dialogic” defense of affirmative action, echoes the same
thought:


Although affirmative action treats innocent white males unequally, it
need not deprive them of any genuine equal opportunity rights.
Provided an affirmative action plan is precisely tailored to
redress the losses in prospects of success [by African-Americans and
women] attributable to racism and sexism, it only deprives innocent
white males of the corresponding undeserved increases in their
prospects of success…. [R]emedial affirmative action does
not take away from innocent white males anything that they have
rightfully earned or that they should be entitled to
 keep (Rosenfeld 1991, 307–8, emphasis added).




However, programs that give blanket preferences by race or gender are
hardly “precisely tailored” to match desert and reward
since, as Lawrence and Matsuda themselves acknowledge at one place,
the white male “privilege” is “statistical”
(Lawrence and Matsuda 1997, 252).  Yet it is individuals, not
statistical averages, who gain or lose in admissions determinations
and employment selections.[29] 


The persistence of this strategy of defense reflects a residual
feeling that the fruits of affirmative action are somehow spoiled if they are
not deserved (Harris 2003). Nevertheless, it is the wrong strategy for defending
real world affirmative action. The programs legitimated under the
Civil Rights Act, in both their nonpreferential and preferential
forms, had—and have—a clear aim: to change institutions so
that they can meet the nondiscrimination mandate of the Act. Selection
by race or gender was—and is—a means to such change. To
the extent that such selection also compensates individuals for past
wrongs or puts people in places they really deserve, these are
incidental by-products of a process aimed at something else.


The same is true with university admissions policy. When the Medical
School of the University of California at Davis offered four reasons
in defense of the special admissions program that left Bakke on the
outside, none of these reasons said anything about matching admissions
and desert. The criteria of the special admissions program—race
and ethnicity—were instruments to further ends: integrating the
classroom, the profession, and the delivery of medical services, and
breaking the chain of self-reproducing societal discrimination.
Likewise, when the University of Michigan and the University of Texas
defended their programs they pointed not to desert rewarded but
educational value generated.


Now, if the neurosurgeon’s son because of his race can
advance each of these goals and the coal miner’s son, because of
his race, cannot, then isn’t the selection decision easy? Pick
the African-American neurosurgeon’s son (however advantaged
he may be) over the
white coal miner’s son (even if he is the
most deserving creature imaginable). The aims of real world
affirmative action make race and ethnicity (and sometimes gender)
salient, not personal desert or merit. The test of real world
affirmative action lies in the urgency of its ends (preventing
discrimination, promoting diversity or integration) and the aptness
(moral and causal) of its means (racial, ethnic, and gender
preferences).  Both remain much in dispute.



====================================================================================================
TITLE: African Sage Philosophy
====================================================================================================
TOC:



1. Oruka’s Project
2. The African Sage Tradition and Eurocentric Bias
3. Literacy and The Oral Tradition in Sage Philosophy
4. Ethnophilosophy, Unanimity and African Critical Thought
5. What counts as Sage Philosophy?
Conclusion
Bibliography
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries





TEXT:

1. Oruka’s Project

The following two examples from this text illustrate the method and
purpose of Oruka’s questioning. When asked what he thought of his own
(Luo) community’s idea of communalism, Paul Mbuya Akoko responded as
follows:

Now the sense in which we may justly say that the Luo in the
traditional setting practiced communalism is not one in which people
generously shared property or wealth. Their idea of communalism is, I
think, of a co-operative nature. For example, where one person had
cattle, everybody ‘ipso facto’ had cattle. For the owner
of the cattle would distribute his cattle among people who did not
have cattle [of their own] so that the less well-off people may take
care of them…[but] never completely given away…The
result is that everybody had cows to look after and so milk to drink.
(Oruka, 1990: 141)


Another sage, Okemba Simiyu Chaungo from the Bukusu community,
responded to the question, “What is truth?” as follows:

When something is true, it is just as you see it … it is just
what it is … just like this bottle … it is true that it
is just a bottle… just what it is. Truth is good. Falsehood is
bad. It is evil. He who says the truth is accepted by good people. A
liar may have many followers … but he is bad.
[Obwatieri … bwatoto. Bwatoto nokhulola
sindu ne siene sa tu … nga inchpa yino olola ichupa ni yene sa
tu.] (Sage Philosophy, p. 111)


And in response to an Interlocutor, who asks “Why would people tell
lies?”, he responded:

So that they may eat… so that they may get empty prestige. They
want to profit fraudulently. (Sage Philosophy, p. 111)


From these examples some of the distinguishing characteristics of Sage
Philosophy can be gleaned. First, they display the deeply personal
nature of the ideas, or opinions, that the sages expressed in response
to the questions. Akoko’s insight derives from his individual
reflections on the practice of communalism to consider its
justification. Second, they provide evidence of abstract thought about
philosophic topics. Chaungo considers what it means for a proposition
to be true and expresses what turns out to be a correspondence theory
of truth — according to which the proposition “This is a
bottle” is true if the object it refers to, this thing, is
indeed a bottle. By pointing out that some people choose deliberately
to be untruthful for unjust gain he also addresses the moral aspects
of truth.

Oruka’s survey of sages aimed to counter three negative claims
regarding the philosophical status of indigenous African thought:

Unlike Greek sages who used reason, African sages do not engage in
philosophic thought.
African sages are part of an oral tradition, whereas philosophic
thought requires literacy.
African traditions encourage unanimity regarding beliefs and
values and discourage individual critical thought.


His reply to these claims has significantly shaped the discourse on
Sage Philosophy. In what follows the criteria he proposed to determine
what counts as Sage Philosophy will be considered in the light of his
critique of the Eurocentric bias against African philosophic thought
and the question of whether literacy is required.
2. The African Sage Tradition and Eurocentric Bias

First, Oruka was concerned about the picture created under colonialism
that, while the sayings of numerous Greek sages such as Thales,
Anaximander, Heraclitus, and other pre-Socratics, were regarded as
“philosophical,” those of traditional African sages were
not. This bias arises out of the implicit belief that philosophy is
the privileged activity of certain races. He believed that this
unjustified belief had further led to the image of philosophy as the
restricted property of Greeks, or Europeans, and, even more
exclusively, the property of white males. Partly concerned with
exposing the falsehood of this Eurocentric attitude, he recognized
that what had raised the apparently simple sayings of the
pre-Socratics to the status of philosophy was the subsequent sustained
commentaries by later philosophers. He maintained that the ideas
expressed by indigenous African sages were no different from those by
the earlier Greeks. When recorded later in books, the sayings of Greek
sages came to be widely regarded as “philosophical,” and
the people who produced them as “philosophers.” Given such
a scenario, Oruka was led to wonder, why would the sayings of Akoko,
or those of Chaungo, for example, not be similarly regarded after they
are committed to writing by a professional philosopher?

Oruka supports his comparison of indigenous African sages with the
pre-Socratics by citing two methods that have contributed to the
growth of philosophy in the West, beginning with its Greek roots. One
direct method of using dialogues is exemplified in the early Platonic
works. Socrates asks primary questions upon which the exposition of
ideas by his interlocutor is based. Oruka viewed his own dialogues
with the sages as an example of this practice in the African context.
Socrates regarded himself as a “mid-wife” of sorts,
because he merely helped those with the knowledge to bring it out. He
brought out what was in each case really the property of his
interlocutors, not his own. Oruka meant his dialogues, in similar
fashion, to capture both this method and its outcome. He maintained
that the sages he and his disciples interviewed were the owners of
their own ideas. The Western-trained philosopher, he says,
“plays the role of philosophical provocation” (Sage
Philosophy, p. 47). The other method, exemplified in the later
Platonic works, involves indirect engagement with the sayings of the
sages through a commentary on their ideas — derived from these
dialogues, or from general acquaintance with the sages’ views. Oruka
believed that, by these two methods, the growth of African philosophy
can take place in a manner similar to the growth of Western
philosophy. Underlying Oruka’s position was his hope that trained
philosophers, regardless of their origins, could take on the sages on
their claims in their commentaries and critiques as this is how
advancement and growth of knowledge partly takes place. This is to
say, in hindsight, that even in Oruka’s own view the sayings of the
sages were not free of critique.
3. Literacy and The Oral Tradition in Sage Philosophy

The influence of colonial bias against unwritten thought was also
challenged by Oruka’s project. By publishing his interviews with the
sages he aimed to counter the second negative claim regarding the
denigration of African thought, namely that “philosophy is and
can only be a ‘written’ enterprise; and so a tradition
without writing is incapabale of philosophy [and that any claim to the
contrary] …is a non-scientific, mythological claim”
(Sage Philosophy, p.xv). He insisted that there are African
thinkers, not yet absorbed into the tradition of the written word,
whose memories are, in terms of consistency and organization, as good
as the information recorded in books (Sage Philosophy, pp.
49–50). Responding to adversaries, he cautioned that:

to argue like the critics, not just of Sage philosophy but of African
philosophy generally have done that Africa is having a late start in
philosophy just because we have no written records of her past
philosophical activities is, wrongfully, to limit the sources from
which we could detect traces of such activities (Sage
Philosophy, p. 50).


Peter Bodunrin was particularly critical of Oruka’s method of
extracting Sage Philosophy. He argued that to show that there were
people, like the indigenous sages, who were capable of philosophical
thinking was one thing, but it was a completely different thing to
show that there were African philosophers who have engaged in
organized systematic reflections on the traditions of their people.
Regarding Bodunrin’s first objection, Oruka’s response, as already
indicated above, was that philosophers often work in response to other
ideas, whether they are the ideas of other philosophers, or popular
ideas in the philosopher’s own setting. Oruka had a relatively longer
response to Bodunrin’s second objection. In another essay popularly
associated with his name, Oruka identified four main trends to be
constitutive of African philosophy, namely (i) African
ethnophilosophy, (ii) African nationalist-ideological philosophy,
(iii) professional African philosophy, and of course, (iv) the African
Sage philosophy under consideration here. Not only do these trends
show different approaches that African philosophers have adopted to
unravel and systematically to expose the underlying principles on
which different departments of African life are based, they also
demonstrate that African philosophy is not limited or confined to the
academic institutions.

Indeed, many African philosophers look far beyond the traditional
philosophical texts for sources and subject matter of philosophical
reflection. For example, while engaging in subtle analytic
philosophical reflections, African philosophers incorporate with great
ease narratives from everyday lives and from literature into their
reflections of the philosophical implications of their cultural
events. Oruka was especially wary of the sub-group among professional
African philosophers whose position regarding African traditional
modes of thought was analogous to European bias in denying reason to
Africans in their traditional settings. It was this attitude,
according to Oruka, that amounted to a claim that Africans lacked a
tradition of organized systematic philosophical reflections on the
thoughts, beliefs, and practices of their own people. He thought that
this view was exemplified in its most eloquent and strongest form by
Peter Bodunrin. In his (Oruka’s) own estimation, Bodunrin had
seriously underestimated the central point in the long tradition of
Western scholarship, popularized by the works of Lévy-Bruhl,
that denied Africans not only the existence of organized systematic
philosophical reflection, but reason itself. Oruka thought that this
view was rather absurd, for no society of humans can live for any
reasonable amount of time, let alone making any advances in their own
ways of seeing and doing things, if they do not have reason, or if the
ideas and concepts upon which their cultures are built do not make
sense. If, on the other hand, critics of African Sage philosophy based
their refutation of the possibility of sage philosophy on the lack of
written philosophical treatises, Oruka countered such a position by
arguing that to exist as a philosopher it is not necessary that one’s
thoughts must be written, or that they must progress — meaning
that they must be commented on or even be available to future
generations. While systematicity is important to the structure and
consistency of good thinking, neither it nor preservation of thought
necessarily requires literacy. Preservation in particular, he thought,
was done selectively by generations for divers emerging reasons and
circumstances, and so was not, in and of itself, the measure of the
philosophical quality of someone’s thoughts. For just as thoughts can
be expressed either in writing, or as unwritten oral reflections,
e.g., sayings and argumentations of sages, so they may be preserved
for a long time by sages, or quickly forgotten and cast into
historically insignificant bits of a community’s past, only to be
remembered by the few whom they touched in some special way.

Oruka’s position, as is also argued forcefully by Kwasi Wiredu,
another African philosopher and Oruka’s contemporary, is that there is
no harm in African philosophers’ creative fusion of influences from
other traditions into their critical evaluations of African beliefs
and practices in different fields (“The Ghanaian Tradition of
Philosophy” in Person and Community, p. 2). Such a fusion is
part of bringing into focus the interplay between philosophy and
practice. Oruka believed, as he explains in Trends in Contemporary
African Philosophy (pp. 17–18), that this is precisely what Kwame
Nkrumah (1964), Léopold S. Senghor (1962), and Julius K.
Nyerere (1968, 1968a), for example, had done in forming their
political-philosophical positions (what Oruka calls “ideological
trends”), all with different results.
4. Ethnophilosophy, Unanimity and African Critical Thought

Although it had been used previously by other writers, the term
“ethnophilosophy” acquired its notoriety in the work of
the Beninois philosopher Paulin Hountondji (1970, 1983). Perhaps
unaware that the term had been used earlier, Hountondji criticized the
Belgian missionary, Placide Tempels’ book, Bantu Philosophy
(first French ed. 1945, and Eng. tr. 1959), as well as his disciples,
among them the French philosopher and ethnographer Marcel Griaule, the
Rwandais philosopher Alexis Kagame, and the Kenyan theologian John
Mbiti, for casting African philosophy as an anonymous system of
thought, without individual thinkers to claim or account for it. By
the end of the 1960s, the positive reception in Anglophone Africa, not
only of Tempels’ Bantu Philosophy, but also John Mbiti’s African
Religions and Philosophy (1969) and Marcel Griaule’s
Conversations with Ogotemmêli that had recently been
translated into English (1965), coincided with the rising tides of
political and cultural nationalism throughout the continent.

The third negative claim Oruka aimed to challenge pertains to the
philosophical status of indigenous African thought. Ethnophilosophy
had falsely popularized the view that traditional Africa was a place
of philosophical unanimity and that African traditions encouraged
unanimity regarding beliefs and values. If this were true it would
allow no room for individual thinkers like, say, Socrates or
Descartes, with their own independent views on such matters. Oruka was
concerned that African intellectuals were drawn into this false
assumption regarding the intellectual inclination of African people,
maintaining the belief that critique is absent from indigenous African
thought. This situation was worsened by the new political movements of
postindependence African nations where one-party political systems
sprang up. By outlawing opposition politics as being both unAfrican
and antinationalist, political leaders often appealed to this view of
unanimity. The Sage Philosophy project objected to this claim
regarding unanimity in Africa, which Oruka regarded as absurd, by
presenting empirical evidence of the diversity of thought among
indigenous thinkers. Oruka insisted that, while rulers everywhere will
always crave unanimity, thinkers thrive in dialogue and diversity of
opinion. He pointed out that Sage philosophy was about thinkers, not
rulers.

Oruka’s desire to distinguish Sage philosophy from ethnophilosophy was
also in response to another false view, partly created by
ethnophilosophy, that indigenous African thought is anonymous. An
important charge against ethnophilosophy has been that, by simply
presenting the teachings of African beliefs in the allegorical modes,
the impression is created that indigenous African modes of thought are
deeply grounded in their mythical representations of reality, thus
leaving the philosophic ideas largely unexplained. With this in mind,
Oruka’s project aimed to counter two types of false perception of
indigenous African thought. First, he separated the myths from the
clearly thought out and logically valid philosophical ideas of
indigenous individual thinkers to make clear what he frequently
referred to as the “anthropological fogs” (Sage
Philosophy, pp. xxi-xxix). Secondly, he contested the idea that a
qualitative mental leap from myth is required for Africans to embrace
philosophical thought. Such a view had been expressed by the Belgian
philosopher Franz Crahay in a widely read article, “Le
décollage conceptuel: conditions d’une philosophie
bantoue” (1965). Although he was critical of ethnophilosophy,
Hountondji was the first philosopher to distance himself from Crahay’s
position, arguing that local knowledge systems were already separate
from myths, as no humans can live on myths. Moral principles, for
example, would have to be abstract in character to be applicable in
general terms beyond one person (Hountondji 1970). According to Wiredu
(1996: 182ff), such independent and critical thinking was available in
varying forms in Akan communities and was the basis of frequently
protracted disputations among elders in search of a consensus
regarding matters that required negotiations. Thus, contrary to the
view that knowledge at the communal level was anonymous, Wiredu argues
that it is precisely in regard to the importance of consensus on
matters of common good that disputation and careful navigation through
different opinions was not just considered to be crucial, but was put
on transparent display until some form of consensus was attained. In
other words, consensus was not imposed, but relentlessly pursued. Such
important matters like just claims to different kinds of rights were
not adjudicated without the input of those members of community who
were well regarded for their independent opinions.

Another point that Oruka makes against the perception of unanimity in
African traditional thought can be found in the expressions of
thinkers whose ideas are grounded in critical analysis and evaluation
of everyday experiences in their communities. Another example of this,
besides such figures as Paulo Mbuya Akoko and others who Oruka
mentions and discusses in the book Sage Philosophy is the
famous Swahili poet, critic, and philosopher Shabaan bin Robert from
then Tanganyika, now Tanzania. Shabaan, famed as a pioneer in the
interface between the oral and the written traditions, has established
a unique legacy as an indigenous independent thinker, whose focus in
his written work was to theorize about metaphysical and social ideals.
About the former, Shabaan theorizes in his work entitled Utubora
Mkulima the attributes of ideal personhood by arguing strongly,
in a dialogical setting, that an ideal person is one whose moral
righteousness is aimed at being a perfect member of community, and
therefore his concerns for common good supersede individual interests
(pp. 26–28). Regarding social ideals, Shabaan argues in
Kusadikika that a good society is defined as one in which all
members are accorded their basic rights and treated with equality
regardless of gender, age, or social status (pp. 29–43). This makes
Shabaan Robert an example of a liberal thinker whose ideas bridge
between indigenous or pre-colonial social structures and values, and
the so-called modern society whose values were significantly
influenced by colonial occupations and interests, as well as new
economic, political, and moral values. In these senses, Shabaan Robert
thought and works complement those of other indigenous thinkers in
critiquing both indigenous and new modes of existence. To Oruka, these
are signs that indigeneity is not, as is widely but falsely thought,
synonymous with anonymity and stagnation in thought.
5. What counts as Sage Philosophy?

According to Oruka, Sage Philosophy is “the expressed thoughts
of wise men and women in any given community and is a way of thinking
and explaining the world that fluctuates between popular wisdom (well
known communal maxims, aphorisms and general common sense truths) and
didactic wisdom, an expounded wisdom and a rational thought of some
given individuals within a community” (Sage Philosophy,
p. 28). Oruka, however, had very definite ideas about who qualifies as
a philosophic sage and how such persons are to be distinguished from
other sages. When asked whether or not philosophy advances knowledge,
Barasa is quoted as saying: “Yes. Being a rational method of
inquiry into the real nature of things, philosophy is a means to
re-examine knowledge and belief” (Sage Philosophy, p.
150). The tendency to express dissatisfaction with the status quo
belief system of their communities is an important critical component
and a criterion Oruka used to identify sages as philosophical.
Dissatisfaction sometimes motivates the philosophic sage to advance
the knowledge that everyone has by subjecting it to scrutiny in order
to determine its validity and worth. While philosophic sages may still
share with others some customary practices and beliefs, or aspects of
them, unlike other members of their community, they emphasize rational
explanations and justifications of courses of action. They owe greater
loyalty to reason than to custom for its own sake. As a result, not
only are sages often a source of new knowledge, but they are also a
catalyst to change within their communities.

In the example cited above, Mbuya defines communalism in terms of a
morality that appeals to the welfare of others as a guide to action.
He indicates its goals, and limitations as a principle that aims at
minimizing socio-economic disparity between the haves and the
have-nots. On Oruka’s view, not every member of society carries out
these kind of elaborations and conceptual clarifications of the
principles that underlie what the majority live at the pragmatic level
only as custom. While he recognizes that there are other indigenous
sages in African communities, he distinguishes these from philosophic
sages such as Mbuya and Chaungo, who are committed to critical inquiry
and to the rational grounding of values and beliefs. Other indigenous
sages, who may be wise in some sense, but not critically oriented, act
as repositories of the statements of the beliefs of their communities,
which they have learned and can repeat, or teach, to others exactly as
they are supposed to be remembered.

This lattter group is exemplified by Ogotemmêli, a sage from the
Dogon community in present-day Mali. His teachings were transcribed
and commented on by the French philosopher and ethnographer Marcel
Griaule in the now classic text, Conversations with
Ogotemmêli: Introduction to Dogon Religious Ideas (Eng. tr.
1965), one of the outstanding texts of indigenous African thought.
Ogotemmêli presents the commonly shared knowledge of the Dogon
community, including not only their very complex theories about the
origin of the universe and the subsequent development of material and
non-material entities in it, but also a startling astronomical system
that points to the Dogon’s pre-telescopic knowledge of the Sirius (A
and B) and their paths across the skies. Yet, despite this pioneer
scientific and mathematical genius, at no time throughout the entire
presentation does one encounter Ogotemmêli as a thinker, only as
the representative and narrator of the collective memory of his
community. His own voice is submerged into a communal mode of
expression. According to Oruka, the absence of any personal direct
reflections on the issues at hand qualifies Ogotemmêli only as a
folk sage. A folk sage is a highly intelligent and good narrator of
traditionally imposed beliefs and myths. He, or she, may explain such
beliefs and values with great detail and may even expound on the
relation between the mythical representations and the lessons in and
for society that they are intended to illustrate. But while the folk
sage hardly veers off the narrative, by contrast, a philosophic sage
is a person “of traditional African culture, capable of the
critical, second-order type of thinking about the various problems of
human life and nature; persons, that is, who subject beliefs that are
traditionally taken for granted to independent rational reexamination
and who are inclined to accept or reject such beliefs on the authority
of reason rather than on the basis of a communal or religious
consensus” (Sage Philosophy, pp. 5–6).

The onisegun, deliberately kept anonymous by Hallen and Sodipo for
reasons of privacy, and who expound and elucidate the traditional
thought of the Yoruba, are certainly wise and very knowledgeable
people. On Oruka’s criteria for philosophic sagacity, however, they
too are only folk sages. They are like Ogotemmêli, whose
presentation, however complex and amazing in details, is exactly what
every wise Dogon person is expected to know (Sage Philosophy,
pp. 9–10). Oruka distinguishes between folk and philosophic
sages, in terms of those who pursue the rational grounding of beliefs
and values, as opposed to those who merely narrate them as they appear
in their commuity’s belief systems.

W. V. O. Quine’s indeterminacy thesis of radical translation presents
a major difficulty for the explanations of the conceptual content and
meaning of terms in Yoruba language provided by the onisegun to Hallen
and Sodipo. Quine attacked the concept of universal propositions and
meanings that are frequently assumed by translators to exist across
all languages. This draws in question the practice of anthropologists
studying African belief systems. Following Quine, Hallen argues that
“Given the cumulative effects of the indeterminacy of
translation between radically different languagaes, an alternative
explanation for such inconsistencies could be that translators have
recourse to contradiction because they, perhaps unwittingly, have not
been able to arrive at a determinate or precise translation”
(A Short History of African Philosophy, pp. 37–8).
Failing to find in non-Western modes of thought precise translations
of comparable rational expressions in their own languages,
anthropologists hastened to conclude that the problem must lie with
the non-Western modes of thought which appear to lack ways of
accommodating rational expressions. Yet, Hallen and Sodipo’s own
conversations with the Yoruba sages illustrate what happens when one
tries to translate, among others, the English term “know”
into Yoruba. The outcome of their comparative analyses shows that our
conceptual assumptions about reality are often tied to the natural
languages we speak. To be fair, Hallen’s and Sodipo’s work is not a
simple description of what the onisegun said. Rather, they attempt to
tease out what was intended conceptually in a language translated as
faithfully as possible into propositions which they contrast with
comparable ones in English. Nonetheless, Oruka maintained that any
such use of Western philosophical language to analyze indigenous
African thought leads to the separation “between an insider in
traditional African philosophy and the outsider analyzing or
describing this philosophy in a language of Western thought. Given
this, the two cannot really meaningfully express their thought to each
other and it would be absurd to find that one can be an expert in the
thought of the other” (Sage Philosophy, p. 15).
Conclusion

It is not entirely clear what Oruka believed ought to be the
relationship between the indigenous philosophic sage and his or her
Western-trained counterpart. What is clear from his remarks is that
the use of Western philosophers, like Quine or Wittgenstein, for
example, as tools for analyzing the conceptual content of African
modes of thought has allowed some scholars to champion “what
they term ‘African philosophy’ by using terminology given
in ‘Western philosophy’. None, so far, has given an
account of what is to be treated as the language of African
philosophy” (Sage Philosophy, p. 15). On this point at
least, Oruka seems to position himself away from philosophers such as
Appiah, Wiredu, and Gyekye. He understood the work of professional
philosophers to be distinct from that of the philosophic sages and
expressed the wish that they could remain so, as a way of preserving
traditions. This idea appears to be implied by his regret that
“The tragedy for man is that the Western intellectual elite has,
over the years, successfully imposed its own culture and philosophy
over the masses. So, British philosophy, for example, is taken to be
the texts of Lockes, Humes, Bacons, Russels, etc.” (Sage
Philosophy, p. 16). Oruka’s concern with the preservation of
indigenous thought suggests that he desired to keep the professional
school of philosophers separate from that of the philosophic sages to
ensure the preservation of the intellectual integrity, not only of the
sages, but of the African heritage as a whole. He was concerned that
the language of African professional philosophers was too dependent on
the Western conceptual lexicon and that its unchecked imposition on
indigenous conceptual schemes might finally contribute to the demise
of the latter.

Among African philosophers, Kwasi Wiredu is particularly sympathetic
to Oruka’s concerns. Writing on the need for conceptual decolonization
in African philosophy, Wiredu claims that such a need would mean both
“avoiding or reversing through a critical conceptual
self-awareness the unexamined assimilation in our thought (that is, in
the thought of contemporary African philosophers) of the conceptual
frameworks embedded in the foreign philosophical traditions that have
had impact on African life and thought…[and] exploiting as much
as is judicious the resources of our own indigenous conceptual schemes
in our philosophical meditations on even the most technical problems
of contemporary philosophy” (Cultural Universals and
Particulars, p. 136). At the same time, Wiredu agrees with other
philosophers like Appiah and Gyekye in insisting that while the
beliefs, proverbs, and customs of African cultures should be included
in the philosophical reflections of the professional, such cultural
elements of folk knowledge also must be subjected to critical analysis
and evaluation because, “There is no pretense…that
recourse to the African vernacular must result in instantaneous
philosophic revelation” (Cultural Universals and
Particulars, p. 138).

Oruka believed that professional African philosophers could interact
with their sagacious counterparts, provided there was sufficient room
for each to flourish separately. This idea suggests that he desired to
expand the location of legitimate philosophical activity beyond the
institutional confines of the academy, which he considered to be
intricately connected to the colonial legacy. It is in this regard
that the idea of African Sage philosophy has provided an important
intervention in the development of contemporary African philosophy,
addressing many crucial issues African philosophers continue to face
in the wider context of postcolonial cultural inquiry, of which
philosophy is only a part. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak in A
Critique of Postcolonial Reason: Toward a History of a Vanishing
Present (1999) has suggested that the self-awareness stage in
postcolonial theory is largely over and that the formerly colonized
cultures are settling down to utilizing their respective cultural
reservoirs without significant attention to the need to reclaim their
indigenous voices, and without minimizing the need for a continued and
sustained awareness of the ever-present Eurocentric impositions. This
orientation is displayed, for example, in Wiredu’s independent, but
comparative, analyses of Western and African concepts, whose
widely-debated epistemological position that “truth is nothing
but opinion,” hinges on the contrast between the objectivist
implications of the claim “I know that” in English and the
non-objectivist implications in the Akan language.

Along with Wiredu, Hallen and Sodipo also hold that very complex
philosophical views are already signaled by many sayings in African
languages, and wait to be teased out through careful analysis and
interpretation. Although Oruka’s idea of the sages as philosophically
savvy in their own languages raises methodical questions as to whether
sage philosophy is the property of the professional philosopher, or of
the indigenous wise person, and only teased out through the prompting
of a professional philosopher, Hallen, Sodipo and Wiredu agree with
his insistence that the distinguishing marks of African philosophy
emerge precisely out of analytical involvement by Western-trained
philosophers, who raise questions regarding the conceptual
underpinnings of indigenous beliefs, values, and languages, and
critically examine their meaning and implications. They propose, on
this basis, to accommodate both indigenous sages, and Western-trained
professionals, as philosophers.


====================================================================================================
TITLE: al-Farabi
====================================================================================================
TOC:



1. Enumeration of the Sciences
2. Language
3. Logic
4. Mathematics and Music
5. Physics
6. Metaphysics
7. Ethics and Politics
8. Conclusion
Bibliography

Research Tools
Primary Literature
Secondary Literature

Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries





TEXT:

1. Enumeration of the Sciences

In what follows we will underline important scholarly developments of
the last thirty years and add useful complements to these listings. In
order to highlight these scholarly developments we will follow the
traditional order of the Aristotelian sciences that
al-Fârâbî himself offers in his Enumeration of
the sciences, ‘Ihsâ’
al-‘ulûm, one of his most famous texts, as its
Medieval Latin versions had much influence in the West. There is no
full English translation of this text, but Amor Cherni (2015)
published an edition with French translation and commentaries.
Recently, a new critical edition with German translation of one of the two
Medieval Latin versions have come out: Über die
Wissenschaften (de scientiis) Dominicus Gundissalinus’
version (2006). Alain Galonnier published a critical edition, French translation and study of the other Medieval latin version: Le De scientiis  Alfarabii de Gerard de Cremone (2016). Following this
traditional theoretical order makes much sense since we know very
little about the chronological order of
al-Fârâbî’s works, even if there is some
indication that The Opinions of the People of the Virtuous
City, also known as The Perfect State, and The
Political Regime, also known as The Principles of the
Beings, may be among his latest works. The paucity of serious
information about the chronological order of
al-Fârâbî’s works makes it difficult to
determine whether some inconsistencies and tensions between different
works result from an evolution in his thought, as Damien Janos claims (2019, pp. 166–70), or hint at a distinction
between exoteric and esoteric treatises or simply arise from
limitations inherent to human nature that affect even the greatest
philosophers. As al-Fârâbî understood philosophy as
all-encompassing and attempted to present coherent views, some works
straddle several philosophical disciplines and so we will indicate
when such is the case. Al-Fârâbî’s knowledge
of Aristotle’s works is extensive, and even includes some of his
zoological treatises.
2. Language

In the Enumeration of the Sciences
al-Fârâbî first focuses on language, grammar,
metrics, etc. His Kitâb al-Hurûf (Book of Letters)
or Particles, gives us much information on his views on
language. Muhsin Mahdi, who published the first edition of this text
in 1969a based on a single manuscript, later on found two other manuscripts but could not complete a new edition. Making
use of the new material already gathered by Mahdi, Charles Butterworth
has prepared a second edition with facing full English
translation to be published by Cornell University Press. Muhammad Ali Khalidi gave a partial English translation
covering the middle section (2005).  Thérèse-Anne Druart
(2010) began studying al-Fârâbî’s innovative
views of language. In Freiburg-im-Brisgau Nadja Germann (2015-16) and her team
have been working on language and logic in classical Arabic and are more and
more impressed by the sophistication of
al-Fârâbî’s positions. As for
al-Fârâbî, music is at the service of speech, the
last section of the Great Book of Music explains how
technically to fit music to speech, i.e., poetry, in order to enhance
the meaning of a text. Azza Abd al-Hamid Madian’s 1992 Ph. D.
dissertation for Cornell University, Language-music relationships
in al-Fârâbî’s “Grand Book of
Music”, includes an English translation of this section.
3. Logic

Next to the study of language, al-Fârâbî considers
logic. For a long time the possibility of a serious study of
al-Fârâbî’s logic remained somewhat elusive.
Editions and translations of his logical works, except for his
[‘Long’] Commentary on Aristotle’s De
Interpretatione (Zimmerman 1981), were scattered in
various journals and collective works often difficult to access. Many
of these texts were more critically edited and gathered
in al-mantiq ‘inda al-Fârâbî, ed. by
Rafîq al-‘Ajam and Majid Fakhry in 4
vol. (1985–87). In 1987–89 Muhammad Taqî
Dânishpazuh published in Qumm a more complete collection of
logical texts, including a newly discovered part of a long commentary
on the Prior Analytics.  Soon afterwards, two books on Farabian logic followed: Shukri
B. Abed, Aristotelian Logic and the Arabic Language in
Alfârâbî (1991) and Joep
Lameer, Al-Fârâbî & Aristotelian
Syllogistics: Greek Theory & Islamic Practice (1994). In 2006 Mauro Zonta published fragments of a long commentary
on the Categories in Hebrew, Arabic, and English translation. John
Watt (2008) assessed the influence of the Syriac organon on
al-Fârâbî and Kamran Karimullah (2014) dedicated a
lengthy article to al-Fârâbî’s views on
conditionals. Translations now are coming out: Alfarabi’s Book of Dialectic (Kitab al-Jadal) (David M. Di Pasquale, 2019), and Al-Farabi, Syllogism (Wilfird Hodges & Saloua Chatti, forthcoming), as well as further studies of al-Farabi’s logic by Saloua Chatti (2019) and papers by Terrence J. Kleven (2013)  and Riccardo Strobino (2019).

Some issues dealt with in logic are also relevant to ethics and
metaphysics. Al-Farabi sees logic as the path to happiness (Germann, 2015). He also discusses the issue of future contingents. If the truth
value of statements on future contingents is immediately determined,
i.e., before the event happens, then everything is predetermined and
freewill is an illusion. Aristotle treats of this issue in On
Interpretation, 9. Al-Fârâbî discusses more
complex aspects of this issue as he adds a consideration of
God’s foreknowledge and defends human freewill against some
theologians (see Peter Adamson (2006), “The Arabic Sea Battle:
al-Fârâbî on the Problem of future
Contingents”).

As Deborah L. Black (1990) showed, following the Alexandrian
tradition, philosophers in Islamic lands consider Rhetoric
and Poetics as integral to logic proper and so parts of
Aristotle’s Organon. Lahcen E. Ezzaher (2008:
347–91) translated the short commentary on the Rhetoric.
Frédérique Woerther (2018) & Maroun Aouad are preparing a
new edition of some of al-Fârâbî’s texts on
rhetoric. Stéphane Diebler in Philosopher à Bagdad
au Xe siècle (2007) [in fact a very useful collection of
translations of short Farabian works] gave a French translation of the
three very brief treatises al-Fârâbî dedicated to
Poetics. Geert Jan van Gelder & Marlé Hammond (2008:
15–23) translated one of these treatises, The Book of
Poetics, into English, as well as a brief relevant passage in the
first part of The Great Book of Music. Terrence J. Kleven (2019) studies The Canons of Poetry.  Scholars interested in
political philosophy have highlighted the distinctions
al-Fârâbî makes between (1) demonstrative discourse,
reflecting Aristotle’s positions in the Posterior
Analytics (in Arabic this text is known as The Book of
Demonstration), and which alone is philosophical stricto
sensu, (2) dialectical discourse, typical of the
“mutakallimûn” or theologians and linked to
Aristotle’s Topics, and (3) rhetorical and poetical
discourse, used in the Qur’ân or Jewish and Christian
Scriptures in order to address ordinary people. 

Great respect for Aristotle’s theory of demonstration led
al-Fârâbî to attempt to fit any theoretical
discipline in its framework, though some of them, such as music, do
not exclusively rest on necessary and universal primary principles, as
they also include principles derived from empirical observations
(Miriam Galston, 2019). As music is dear to
al-Fârâbî, it is in the first part of his Great
Book on Music that we find the most extensive consideration of
primary empirical principles and their derivation from careful
examination of practice, i.e., in this case of musical
performances.
4. Mathematics and Music

After logic comes mathematics. For al-Fârâbî
mathematical sciences include arithmetic, geometry, optics, astronomy,
music, the science of weights and mechanics. Only recently has more
attention be paid to this aspect of Farabian thought. Gad Freudenthal
(1988) focused on al-Fârâbî’s views on
geometry. Except for pointing to al-Fârâbî’s
rejection, in contradistinction to al-Kindî, of the validity of
what we now call astrology, scholars had neglected his views on
astronomy and cosmology. Damien Janos’s Method, Structure,
and Development in al-Fârâbî’s Cosmology
(2012) has filled this gap. His book throws new light on various
aspects of al-Fârâbî’s astronomy, cosmology,
and philosophy of nature. It also highlights the link between
cosmology and metaphysics. Johannes Thomann (2010–11) pointed to
a newly discovered commentary on the Almagest attributed to
al-Fârâbî (Ms. Tehran Maglis 6531).

In the Enumeration al-Fârâbî follows the
traditional classification of music under mathematics. In The
Great Book of Music he certainly indicates that music derives
some of its principles from mathematics but he also insists, as we
said above, on the importance of performance for determining its
empirical principles. On some points the ear, rather than theoretical
reflections, is the ultimate judge, even if at times the ear
contradicts some mathematical principle. For instance, he is well
aware that a semitone is not exactly the half of a tone. Of The
Great book of Music there exists only one full translation, that
of Rodolphe d’Erlanger into French (originally published in
1930–35 before the Arabic text was edited; reprint 2001). Only
partial English translations exist. I referred to two of them: one in
the section on language and one in the logic section under poetics.
George Dimitri Sawa (2009) translated the two chapters on rhythm.
Alison Laywine (McGill University), both a philosopher with excellent
knowledge of Greek musical theories and a ‘Oud player, is
preparing a full English translation of this complex and lengthy text.
Yet, The Great Book is not the only text
al-Fârâbî dedicated to music. After having written
it, dissatisfied with his explanation of rhythms, he subsequently
wrote two shorter texts on rhythms (English translation of both by Sawa
2009). Apparently al-Fârâbî invented a system of
notation for rhythms.  In his Philosophies of Music in Medieval
Islam Fadlou Shehadi (1995) dedicates his third chapter to
al-Fârâbî.  Thérèse-Anne Druart (2020) shows how al-Farabi links music to language, logic and even politics.
5. Physics

After mathematics comes physics. We have only a few Farabian texts
dealing with physics taken in the broadest sense and covering the
whole of natural philosophy. Paul Lettinck addresses some of
al-Fârâbî’s views on physics in his
Aristotle’s Physics and its Reception in the Arabic
World (1994) and Janos (2012) also does so. Marwan Rashed (2008)
attempted a reconstruction of a lost treatise on changing beings.

Al-Fârâbî wrote a little treatise rejecting the
existence of the vacuum by means of an experiment. Necati Lugal & Aydin Sayili (1951)
published the Arabic with an English translation.

The substantive Refutation of Galen’s Critique of
Aristotle’s Views on Human Organs merits serious studies.
‘Abdurrahman Badawi edited it in his Traités
philosophiques (1983: 38–107). It shows
al-Fârâbî’s interest in Aristotle’s
zoological works and develops interesting parallels between the
hierarchical structure of the organs of the human body, that of
cosmology, that of emanation, and that of the ideal state. Badr El-Fakkak (2017) explains these parallels and Jawdath Jadour (2018) studies the structure of this text, which remains untranslated, and presents a new edition of al-Farabi’s Epistle on medicine. 

Physics includes Aristotle’s On the soul and scholars
have paid much attention to al-Fârâbî’s little
treatise On intellect (ed. by M. Bouyges, 1983). A full
English translation of this important treatise, of which there exist
two Medieval Latin versions, was finally given by McGinnis &
Reisman in their Classical Arabic Philosophy (2007:
68–78). Philippe Vallat published an extensive study of al-Farabi’s views on the intellect (2019a). The issue of the soul and the intellect is linked to logic, ethics, cosmology, and metaphysics. It also gives rise to a
debate. Earlier scholars considered that for
al-Fârâbî universals are acquired by emanation from
the Agent Intellect, which for him is the tenth and last Intelligence,
even if in many passages the second master uses the language of
abstraction. Recently, Richard Taylor (2006 & 2010) argued that,
on the contrary, there is genuine abstraction in
al-Fârâbî, even if in some ways it involves the
emanative power of the Agent Intellect.
6. Metaphysics

Metaphysics follows physics. It is not easy to assess
al-Fârâbî’s understanding of metaphysics. The
very brief treatise, The Aims of Aristotle’s
Metaphysics, insists that, contrary to what most people assume,
metaphysics is not a theological science but rather investigates
whatever is common to all existing beings, such as being and unity.
McGinnis and Reisman provide a full English translation in their
Classical Arabic Philosophy (2007: 78–81). In 1989
Muhsin Mahdi published the Arabic text of a short treatise On One
and Unity. It is still untranslated but Damien Janos (2017) explained its structure and contents and Philippe Vallat (2019b) studied it. Many passages of The Book of Letters are of
great metaphysical import as Stephen Menn (2008) showed. These texts
raise the question of the exact relation between logic and
metaphysics, as, for instance, both disciplines treat of the
categories (see Thérèse-Anne Druart (2007) & Kristell Trego (2018)). Such texts
present an Aristotelian outlook focusing on ontology that sharply
distinguishes metaphysics from Kalâm and seem to leave limited
space for philosophical theology and Neo-Platonic descent in
particular.

On the other hand, both The Opinions of the People of the Perfect
City and The Political Regime or The Principles of
Beings begin with a metaphysical part presented as a Neo-Platonic
descent followed by a second part dealing with the organization of the
city or state and do not treat of being and unity as the most
universal notions. The hierarchical structure of the ideal state
mirrors the hierarchical emanationist structure presented in the first
part. Walzer edited the former with an English translation under the
title The Perfect State (1985) and Fauzi M. Najjar edited the
latter (1964). Charles Butterworth (2015) provided the first full
English translation of The Political Regime in The
Political Writings, vol. II, pp. 27–94. The question of how
exactly the ontology relates to the Neo-Platonic descent or emanation
has not yet been fully clarified, though The Enumeration of the
Sciences addresses both aspects. Furthermore, whether the
Neo-Platonic descent grounds the political philosophy or metaphysics
is simply a rhetorical appeal to make
al-Fârâbî’s controversial political and
philosophical views palatable to religious authorities and ordinary
people is a hotly debated issue. Disciples of Leo Strauss and of
Muhsin Mahdi divide al-Fârâbî’s views into
exoteric ones for a broad audience and esoteric ones written for an
intellectual elite. The exoteric are more compatible with the
religious views and speak, for instance, of an immortality of the
human soul, whereas such views are deliberately muted in esoteric
writings (below we will see that a lost treatise of
al-Fârâbî may have denied the immortality of the
soul). Among the most recent “Straussian” positions on
this debate one can find two papers by Charles E. Butterworth: (1)
“How to Read Alafarabi” (2013), and (2)
“Alfarabi’s Goal: Political Philosophy, Not Political
Theology” (2011). Recently, Philippe Vallat (2019c) attempted to clarify what al-Farabi means by “esoterism,” Some other scholars such as Dimitri Gutas, S. Menn
and Th.-A. Druart take Farabian metaphysics, including the
Neo-Platonic descent as at the core of
al-Fârâbî’s works, even if in his
Philosophy of Aristotle, al-Fârâbî treats
little of metaphysics. We will say more on this controversy in
presenting ethics and politics, which in the Farabian classification
of sciences, follow metaphysics.
 7. Ethics and Politics

Al-Fârâbî dealt little with ethics, but part of the
controversy stems from what we may know of his lost Commentary on
the Nicomachean Ethics, his main foray in Ethics. Despite the
existence of an Arabic translation of Aristotle’s
Nicomachean Ethics (ed. by A. A. Akasoy & A. Fidora with
an English translation by D.M. Dunlop, 2005), we see few signs of its
influence in al-Fârâbî’s extant writings. Yet,
al-Fârâbî wrote on it a lost commentary, to which
three Andalusian philosophers, Ibn Bâjja, Ibn Tufayl and
Averroes, refer. According to them, therein
al-Fârâbî denied the immortality of the human soul
as well as the possibility of any conjunction with the active or Agent
Intellect, considering them tall tales. Yet, in many other works, such
as the Treatise on the Intellect, the Opinions, and
the Political Regime, he claims that this conjunction is
possible and constitutes ultimate happiness. If what the Andalusian
philosophers report, presents an accurate reading of this lost text,
then the disciples of Leo Strauss may have some justification in reading
al-Fârâbî’s works as divided between exoteric
and esoteric ones since the content of this work would contradict
views in more popular texts, such as the Opinions in which
the Neo-Platonic influence is the strongest. Neo-Platonic metaphysics,
construed mainly as the descent and emanation, would provide an
exoteric view good for a more general public, but denied in the
esoteric works reserved for an intellectual elite. Chaim
Meir Neria (2013) published two quotations from this commentary (in
Hebrew translation and with English translation) that have been newly
discovered and gave a summary of the issue. 

Though we do not have any ethical text from
al-Fârâbî relying mainly on the Nicomachean
Ethics, Marwan Rashed (2019) discussed his ethical outlook in relying on the Attainment of Happiness. We do have a brief ethical treatise in the tradition of
Hellenistic ethics, Directing Attention to the Way of
Happiness or Tanbîh (not to be confused with the
Attainment of Happiness or Tahsîl), which is
propaedeutic to the study of philosophy proper and of logic in
particular (English translation in McGinnis & Reisman’s
Classical Arabic Philosophy (2007: 104–20)). This
treatise (1) incites the student to curb his passions in order to be
able to focus on his studies and (2) encourages him to begin the study
of philosophy and of logic in particular. It is obviously
pre-philosophical and serves as introduction to a Farabian elementary
introduction to logic The Utterances Employed in Logic
(Mahdi’s edition, 1968;
no English translation). Al-Fârâbî’s
conception of truly philosophical ethics remains unclear as we have so
little extended textual basis to establish it. Janne Mattila (2017) compared the philosopher’s ethical progression in al-Farabi and in al-Razi. Ethics, when treating of our relations with other people, implies intersubjectivity, but al-Farabi, though not treating it much in what concerns this life, offers an interesting picture of it in the afterlife (Druart, 2017).

Al-Fârâbi’s political philosophy fared much better
and has attracted much attention from many scholars. According to
The Enumeration, it also includes kalâm, i.e.,
non-philosophical theology, and fiqh or Islamic law. Many
Farabian political works have been translated into English. Muhsin
Mahdi translated three of them in Philosophy of Plato and
Aristotle (1969b; reprint 2001), which contains The Attainment
of Happiness, The Philosophy of Plato, and The
Philosophy of Aristotle. These three texts form a trilogy.
Charles E. Butterworth in, The Political Writings, vol. I
(2001), translated Selected Aphorisms, part V of The
Enumeration of the Sciences, Book of Religion, and
The Harmonization of the Two Opinions of the Two Sages: Plato the
Divine and Aristotle and in vol. II (2015), Political
Regime and Summary of Plato’s Laws. 

Al-Fârâbî does not take inspiration from
Aristotle’s Politics (a text which does not seem to
have been translated or summarized into Arabic) but rather takes some
inspiration from Plato’s Republic and Laws,
even if his access to these two texts may have been rather limited, as
there is some doubt that a full Arabic translation of them ever
existed. Though Averroes wrote a commentary of sort on the
Republic, its brevity and content do not testify to an
in-depth knowledge of the whole text. Yet, David C. Reisman (2004)
discovered an Arabic translation of a single passage from the
Republic (VI, 506d3–509b10). As for the Laws,
we certainly have al-Fârâbî’s Summary of
Plato’s Laws, but this text (Arabic ed. by Th.-A. Druart
(1998) and English translation by Butterworth, in The Political
Writings, II, (2015: 129–73)) is very brief and covers only
the first eight books. Whether this summary relies on a full or
partial Arabic translation of the Laws or on a translation of
a Greek summary, possibly that of Galen (lost in Greek), at this stage
cannot be determined. For the latest status quaestionis about
Arabic translations of Plato’s works and their paucity, see
Dimitri Gutas (2012). Al-Fârâbî’s own brief
Philosophy of Plato does not exhibit detailed knowledge of
Plato’s works.

Though al-Fârâbî’s political philosophy takes
some inspiration from Plato, it much transforms it in important and
interesting ways to reflect a very different world and adapt it to it.
Instead of a monolingual and monoethnic city state,
al-Fârâbî envisions a vast multicultural,
multilingual, and multireligious empire (Alexander Orwin, 2017). He also sees the necessity to
make of the philosopher king a philosopher prophet ruler. 

Al-Fârâbî’s Summary of Plato’s
Laws caused much controversy, which Butterworth narrates in the
introduction to his translation (2015: 97–127). In 1995 Joshua
Parens, making use of a draft of Druart’s edition, published
Metaphysics as Rhetoric: Alfarabi’s Summary of
Plato’s “Laws”. He argued that
al-Fârâbî takes metaphysics, or maybe more exactly
special metaphysics or the Neo-Platonic descent, i.e., what treats of
immaterial beings rather than ontology, as a form of rhetoric, and
that such was already the case for Plato. Whether or not we should
read Plato as Parens and other Straussians claim
al-Fârâbî understood him is a hotly debated
question. 

Marwan Rashed (2009) introduced a new element in the controversy by
putting into serious doubt the authenticity of
al-Fârâbî’s Harmonization of the Opinions
of the Two Sages. Following an Alexandrian tradition, this
treatise (for Butterworth’s 2001 English translation, see above)
argues that, despite a series of issues on which Aristotle and Plato
seem to contradict each other, there is remarkable harmony between
these two sages, as one can easily resolve such contradictions. This
text also refers (1) to the so-called Aristotle’s
Theology, which in fact Aristotle never wrote, as it derives from
Plotinus, and (2) to Proclus Arabus, as Peter Adamson (forthcoming)
shows. On the other hand, Cecilia Martini Bonadeo, in her 2008
critical edition and Italian translation of this text
(al-Fârâbî, L’armonia delle opinioni dei
due sapienti, il divino Platone e Aristotele), argued for the
Farabian authenticity of this text.  Whether one accepts the Farabian
authorship of this text affects one’s understanding of the whole
controversy of how to read al-Fârâbî, as well as
one’s understanding of the relationship between his
Aristotelianism and his Neo-Platonism. It also makes the whole issue
of the relationship between his metaphysics and his political
philosophy still more complex and convoluted.

Among the most recent developments, expressed in various articles, on
the Straussian side, let us point to Butterworth’s “How to
Read Alfarabi” (2013) and “Alfarabi’s Goal:
Political Philosophy, Not Political Theology” (2011) to which I
referred earlier. On the other side, we can point to Charles
Genequand’s “Théologie et philosophie. La
providence chez al-Fârâbî et
l’authenticité de l’Harmonie des opinions des
deux sages” (2012), which objects to M. Rashed’s
declaring the Harmonization inauthentic, and his (2013)
“Le Platon d’al-Fârâbî”. Amor
Cherni (2015), on the other hand, published a book on the
relation between politics and metaphysics in
al-Fârâbî (La cité et ses opinions:
Politique et métaphysique ches Abû Nasr
al-Fârâbî), which includes an appendix
rejecting the authenticity of The Harmonization. 
8. Conclusion

Though we now have more decent editions of
al-Fârâbî’s texts and more complete
translations, in English and in French in particular, many such
editions and translations are scattered in various books and journals.
Gathering all of al-Fârâbî’s available texts
is no mean accomplishment. If Oxford University Press would publish
The Philosophical Works of al-Fârâbî, as it
did for al-Kindî in 2012 (one volume, ed. by P. Adamson &
P.E. Pormann), beginning with those still untranslated or not fully
translated into English, as well as those whose English translation is
hidden in rare books or unusual journals, we would be eternally
grateful, but we are well aware that it would require several volumes
and much time. 

Some texts still need to be better edited. Some texts are not
translated at all into any European language or not yet into English.
Scholars do not always seem fully aware of what is available and what
other scholars have said. Much more work still needs to be done, but a
clearer and more complex picture of
al-Fârâbî’s works is emerging. It highlights
their breadth and sophistication, even if we still have trouble
piecing together all the parts. 


====================================================================================================
TITLE: Alienation
====================================================================================================
TOC:



1. The Basic Idea

1.1 Introduced
1.2 Elaborated
1.3 Modesty Of


2. Adjacent Concepts

2.1 Introduced
2.2 Fetishism
2.3 Objectification


3. Subjective and Objective Alienation

3.1 The Distinction Between Subjective and Objective Alienation
3.2 Diagnostic Schema
3.3 Applications


4. What Makes a Separation Problematic?

4.1 Criteria of ‘Impropriety’
4.2 Essential Human Nature
4.3 An Alternative Criterion


5. Alienation and Value

5.1 Negative Element
5.2 Positive Element
5.3 Morality as Alienating


6. Some (Unresolved) Empirical Issues

6.1 Content
6.2 Extent
6.3 Prognosis


Bibliography
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries





TEXT:

1. The Basic Idea
1.1 Introduced

The term ‘alienation’ is usually thought to have comparatively modern
European origins. In English, the term had emerged by the early
fifteenth century, already possessing an interesting cluster of
associations. ‘Alienation’, and its cognates, could
variously refer: to an individual’s estrangement from God (it
appears thus in the Wycliffe Bible); to legal transfers of ownership
rights (initially, especially in land); and to mental derangement (a
historical connection that survived into the nineteenth-century usage
of the term ‘alienist’ for a psychiatric doctor). It is
sometimes said that ‘alienation’ entered the German
language via English legal usage, although G.W.F. Hegel
(1770–1831), for one, typically uses
‘Entäusserung’, and not
‘Entfremdung’ to refer to property transfer
(Hegel 1991a: §65). (It is only the latter term which has an
etymological link to ‘fremd’ or
‘alien’.) Moreover, perhaps the first philosophical
discussion of alienation, at least of any sophistication, was in
French. In the Second Discourse, Jean-Jacques Rousseau
(1712–1778) diagnoses ‘inflamed’ forms of amour
propre—a love of self (which is sometimes rendered as
‘pride’ or ‘vanity’ in older English
translations)—whose toxicity is amplified by certain social and
historical developments, as manifesting themselves in alienated forms
of self; that is, in the actions and lives of individuals who have
somehow become divided from their own nature (see Rousseau 1997, and
Forst 2017, 526–30).

There are limits to what can usefully be said about the concept of
alienation in general; that is, what can usefully be said without
getting involved in the complexities of particular accounts, advanced
by particular authors, or associated with particular intellectual
traditions. However, there is a basic idea here which seems to capture
many of those authors and traditions, and which is not unduly
elusive or difficult to understand.

This basic idea of alienation picks out a range of social and
psychological ills involving a self and other. More precisely, it
understands alienation as consisting in the problematic separation of
a subject and object that belong together.
1.2 Elaborated

That formulation of the basic idea is perhaps too abbreviated to be
easily intelligible, and certainly benefits from a little elaboration.
The characterisation of alienation offered here—as a social or
psychological ill involving the problematic separation of a subject
and object that belong together—involves three constituent
elements: a subject, an object, and the relation between them. It will
be helpful to say a little more about each of these in turn.

First, the subject here is a self; typically, but not
necessarily, a person, an individual agent. ‘Not
necessarily’ because the subject could also be, for instance, a
group of some kind. There seems to be no good reason to deny that a
collective as well as an individual agent might be alienated from some
object. For instance, as well as Anna being alienated from her
government, it might be that women or citizens find themselves
alienated from their government.

Second, the relevant object can take a variety of forms.
These include: entities which are not a subject; another subject or
subjects; and oneself. The object here might be an entity which is not
a subject; for example, Beatrice might be alienated from the natural
world, from a social practice, from an institution, or from a social
norm, where none of those entities are understood as agents of any
kind. In addition, the object might be an entity which is another
subject, another person or group; for example, Beatrice might be
alienated from her childhood friend Cecile, and Beatrice might also be
alienated from her own family. Lastly, the object here might be the
original subject; that is, there might be reflexive variants of the
relation, for example, in which Beatrice is alienated from
herself.

Third, the relation is one of problematic separation between
a subject and object that belong together. All of these elements are required: there has to be a separation; the separation has to be problematic; and it has to obtain
between a  subject and object that properly belong together.

The idea of separation is important. Not all problematic
relations between relevant entities involve alienation. For instance,
being overly integrated into some other object might also be a
problematic or dysfunctional relation but it is not what is typically
thought of as alienation. Imagine, for instance, that Cecile has no
life, no identity, finds no meaning, outside of her family membership.
It is tempting, at least for modern individuals, to say that she has
an ‘unhealthy’ relationship with her family, but it would
seem odd to say that she was alienated from it. Alienation typically
involves a separation from something.

These problematic separations can be indicated by a wide
variety of words and phrases. No particular vocabulary seems to be
required by the basic idea. The linguistic variety here might include
words suggesting: breaks (‘splits’,
‘ruptures’, ‘bifurcations’,
‘divisions’, and so on); isolation
(‘indifference’, ‘meaninglessness’,
‘powerlessness’, ‘disconnection’, and so on);
and hostility (‘conflicts’, ‘antagonism’,
‘domination’, and so on). All these, and more, might be
ways of indicating problematic separations of the relevant kind. Of
course, particular authors may use language more systematically, but
there seems little reason to insist that a specific vocabulary is
required by the basic idea.

The idea of the relevant separation having to be, in some way,
problematic, is also important. Separations between a subject
and object do not necessarily appear problematic. Relations of
indifference, for example, might or might not be problematic. For an
unproblematic instance, consider Daniela, a distinguished Spanish
architect, who—when it is brought to her
attention—discovers that she is unconcerned with, and apathetic
towards, the complex constitutional relationship between the Pacific
islands of Niue and New Zealand. Her indifference in this case looks
unproblematic. Less obviously perhaps, the same might be true of
relations of hostility; that is, that hostility also might or might
not be problematic. For an unproblematic instance, consider Enid and
Francesca, two highly competitive middleweight boxers competing in the
Olympics for the first time. It may well be that a certain amount of
antagonism and rancour between these two individual sportswomen is
entirely appropriate; after all, if Enid identifies too closely with
Francesca—imagine her experiencing every blow to
Francesca’s desires and interests as a defeat for her
own—she is not only unlikely to make it to the podium, but is
also, in some way, failing qua boxer.

The suggestion here is that to be appropriately
problematic—appropriate, that is, to constitute examples of
alienation—the separations have to obtain between a subject and
object that properly belong together (Wood 2004: 3). More
precisely, that the candidate separations have to frustrate or
conflict with the proper harmony or connectedness between that subject
and object. Imagine, for instance, that both the indifference of
Daniela, and the hostility of Enid, now also take appropriately
problematic forms. Perhaps we discover that Daniela has become
increasingly indifferent to her lifelong vocation, that she no longer
cares about the design and construction issues over which she had
previously always enthused and obsessed; whilst Enid has started to develop feelings of loathing and suspicion for her domestic partner who she had previously trusted and loved. What makes these examples of separation (indifference and hostility) appear appropriately problematic is that they violate some
baseline condition of harmony or connectedness between the relevant
entities. (A baseline condition that does not seem to obtain in the
earlier examples of unproblematic separation.) Alienation
obtains when a separation between a subject and object that properly
belong together, frustrates or conflicts with that baseline
connectedness or harmony. To say that they properly belong together is
to suggest that the harmonious or connected relation between the
subject and object is rational, natural, or good. And, in turn, that
the separations frustrating or conflicting with that baseline
condition, are correspondingly irrational, unnatural, or bad. (For
some resistance to this characterisation, see Gilabert 2020,
55–56.) Of course, that is not yet to identify what might establish
this baseline harmony as, say, rational, natural, or good. Nor is it
to claim that the disruption of the baseline harmony is
all-things-considered bad, that alienation could never be a justified
or positive step. (These issues are discussed further in sections 4.1
and 5.2, respectively.)
1.3 Modesty Of

This basic idea of alienation appears to give us a diverse but
distinct set of social and psychological phenomena; picking out a
class of entities which might have little in common other than this
problematic separation of subject and object. The problematic
separations here are between the self (including individual and
collective agents) and other (including other selves, one’s own
self, and entities which are not subjects). So understood, the basic
idea of alienation seems to play largely a diagnostic or critical
role; that is, the problematic separations might indicate that
something is awry with the self or social world, but do not, in
themselves, offer an explanation of, or suggest a solution to, those
ills. 

On this account, the basic idea of alienation looks conceptually
rather modest. In particular, this idea is not necessarily committed
to certain stronger claims that might sometimes be found in the
literature. That all these social and psychological ills are
characterised by a problematic separation, for example, does not make
alienation a natural kind, anymore than—to borrow an example
associated with John Stuart Mill—the class of white objects is a
natural kind (Wood 2004: 4). Nor, for instance, need there be any
suggestion that the various forms of alienation identified by this
account are necessarily related to each other; that, for example, they
are all explained by the same underlying factor. Of course, particular
theorists may have constructed—more or less
plausible—accounts of alienation that do advance those, or
similar, stronger claims. For instance, the young Karl Marx
(1818–1883) is often understood to have suggested that one of
the systematic forms of alienation somehow explains all the other ones
(Wood 2004: 4). The claim here is simply that these, and other,
stronger claims are not required by the basic idea.

That said, the basic idea of alienation appears to require only a few
additions in order to extend its critical reach significantly.
Consider two further suggestions often made in this context: that
alienation picks out an array of non-trivial social and psychological
ills that are prevalent in modern liberal societies; and that the idea
of ‘alienation’ is distinct from that of
‘injustice’ on which much modern liberal political
philosophy is focused. These familiar claims are not extravagant, but,
so understood, the concept of alienation would appear to have some
critical purchase on both contemporary liberal societies (for
containing alienation) and contemporary liberal political philosophy
(for neglecting alienation). The implied critical
suggestion—that the concept of alienation reveals that something
significant is awry with both liberal society and liberal
understandings—looks far from trivial. (Of course, establishing
that those purported failings reveal fundamental flaws in either
liberal society, or liberal political philosophy, is rather harder to
accomplish.)

Particular theories of alienation typically restrict the range of
problematic separations that they are interested in, and introduce
more explanatory accounts of the extent and prognosis of alienation so
characterised. They might, for instance, focus on social rather than
psychological ills, and maintain that these are caused by certain
structural features—particular aspects of its economic
arrangements, for instance—of the relevant society. Such
explanatory claims are of considerable interest. After all,
understanding the cause of a problem looks like a helpful step towards
working out whether, and how, it might be alleviated or overcome.
However, these explanatory claims are not readily open to general
discussion, given the significant disagreements between particular
thinkers and traditions that exist in this context. Note also that
introducing these various restrictions of scope, and various competing
explanatory claims, increases the complexity of the relevant account.
However, these complexities alone scarcely explain the—somewhat
undeserved—reputation that the concept of alienation has for
being unduly difficult or elusive. It might be that their impact is
compounded—at least in the intellectual traditions with which
the concept of alienation is most often associated (Hegelianism and
Marxism)—by language and argumentative structures that are
unfamiliar to some modern readers.
2. Adjacent Concepts
2.1 Introduced

It may be helpful to say something about the relation of alienation to
what can be called ‘adjacent’ concepts. The two examples
discussed here are both drawn from Hegelian and Marxist traditions;
namely, the concepts of fetishism and objectification. Disambiguating
the relationship between these various concepts can help clarify the
general shape of alienation. However, they are also discussed because
particular accounts of alienation, both within and beyond those two
traditions, are sometimes said—more or less plausibly—to
conflate alienation either with fetishism, or with objectification. Even if some particular treatments of alienation
do equate the relevant concepts with each other, alienation is better
understood as synonymous with neither fetishism nor
objectification. Rather, fetishism is only one form that alienation can take, and not all objectification involves alienation.
2.2 Fetishism

The first of these adjacent ideas is fetishism.
‘Fetishism’ refers here to the idea of human creations
which have somehow escaped (we might say that they have
inappropriately separated out from) human control, achieved the
appearance of independence, and come to enslave or dominate their
creators.

Within Hegelian and Marxist traditions, a surprisingly wide range of
social phenomena—including religion, the state, and private
property—have been characterised as having the character of a
fetish. Indeed, Marx sometimes treats the phenomenon of fetishism as a
distinguishing feature of modernity; where previous historical epochs
were characterised by the rule of persons over persons, capitalist
society is characterised by the rule of things over persons.
‘Capital’, we might say, has come to replace the feudal
lord. Consider, for instance, the frequency with which ‘market
forces’ are understood and represented within modern culture as
something outside of human control, as akin to natural forces which
decide our fate. In a famous image—from the Communist
Manifesto—Marx portrays modern bourgeois society as
‘like the sorcerer, who is no longer able to control the powers
of the nether world whom he has called up by his spells’ (Marx
and Engels 1976: 489).

In order to elaborate this idea of fetishism, consider the example of
Christian religious consciousness, as broadly understood in the
writings of Ludwig Feuerbach (1804–1872). (Feuerbach was a
contemporary of, and important influence on, the young Marx, amongst
others.) The famous, and disarmingly simple, conclusion of
Feuerbach’s philosophical analysis of religious consciousness is
that, in Christianity, individuals are worshipping the predicates of
human nature, freed of their individual limitations and projected onto
an ideal entity. For Feuerbach, however, this is no purely
intellectual error, but is rather ripe with social, political, and
psychological consequences, as this ‘deity’ now comes to
enslave and dominate us. Not least, the Christian God demands real
world sacrifices from individuals, typically in the form of a denial
or repression of their essential human needs. For instance, the
Christian idea of marriage is portrayed as operating in a way that
represses and punishes, rather than hallows and satisfies, the flesh
of humankind (Leopold 2007: 207–210).

Religious consciousness, on this Feuerbachian account, looks to be a
case where alienation takes the form of fetishism. That is, there is
both a problematic separation here between subject and object
(individuals and their own human nature), and it takes the form of a
human creation (the idea of the species embodied in God) escaping our
control, achieving the appearance of independence, and coming to
enslave and dominate us. The same looks to be true, on
Marx’s account, of production in contemporary capitalist
societies. Capital takes on the appearance of an independent social
power which determines what is produced, how it is produced, and the
economic (and other) relations between producers. Marx himself was
struck by the parallel, and in the first volume of Capital,
offers the following analogy: ‘As, in religion, man is governed
by the products of his own brain, so in capitalistic production, he is
governed by the products of his own hand’ (Marx 1996: 616).
However, rather than equating alienation and fetishism, fetishism is
better thought of as a particular form that alienation might take. (To
be clear, there looks to be no reason to think that Marx would, or
should, disagree with this claim.)

Note, in particular, that although Marx’s discussions of
alienation often utilise the language of fetishism, not all of them
take that form. Consider, for instance, the problematic separation
sometimes said to exist between modern individuals and the natural
world, as the former think of themselves and behave as if they were
isolated, or cut off, or estranged, from the latter. The idea here is
reflected in the less ‘Promethean’ moments of Marx’s
work, for example, in the suggestion that the appropriate relation
between humankind and nature would involve not our instrumental
domination of ‘the other’, but rather a sympathetic
appreciation of our complex interdependence with the natural world of
which we are, in reality, a part. Those moments are perhaps most
evident in Marx’s discussion of contemporary
‘ecological’ threats—including deforestation,
pollution, and population growth—and typically involve his
‘metabolic’ account of the appropriate relation between
humankind and nature (Foster 1999). The inappropriate modern relation
between humankind and nature here looks like an example of
alienation—there is a problematic separation of self and
other—but certain central characteristics of fetishism would
appear to be absent. Most obviously, the natural world is not a human
creation which has escaped our control; not least, because
nature is not a human creation. Moreover, the impact on humankind
of this particular separation does not comfortably suit the language
of enslavement and domination. Indeed, if anything, our inappropriate
separation from the natural world seems to find expression in our own
ruthlessly instrumental treatment of nature, rather than in
nature’s tyranny over us.
2.3 Objectification

The second of these adjacent ideas is objectification. The
concept in question is not the idea of objectification—familiar
from certain feminist and Kantian traditions—which concerns the
moral impropriety of systematically treating a human being as if she
were an object, thing, or commodity (Nussbaum 1995). That is a
distinct and important phenomenon, but it is not the one that is
relevant here. In the present context, objectification refers rather
to the role of productive activity in mediating the evolving
relationship between humankind and the natural world. This association
is most familiar from certain Hegelian and Marxist traditions, with
Marx often using the German term
‘Vergegenständlichung’ to capture what is
here called ‘objectification’ (e.g., 1975: 272).

Humankind is seen as being part of, and dependent upon, the natural
world. However, nature is initially somewhat stingy with its
blessings; as a result, human beings confront the natural world from
an original position of scarcity, struggling through productive
activity of various kinds to change the material form of
nature—typically through making things—in ways that make
it better reflect and satisfy their own needs and interests. In that
evolving process, both the natural world and humankind come to be
transformed. Through this collective shaping of their material
surroundings, and their increasing productivity, the natural world is
made to be, and seem, less ‘other’, and human beings
thereby come to objectify themselves, to express their essential
powers in concrete form. These world transforming productive
activities, we might say, embody the progressive self-realisation of
humankind.

On this account, all productive activity would seem to involve
objectification. However, Marx insists that not all productive
activity involves alienation. Moreover, some other forms of
alienation—unrelated to productive activity—have no
obvious connection with objectification.

Marx maintains that productive activity might or might not take an
alienated form. For instance, productive activity in capitalist
societies is typically said to take an alienated form; whereas
productive activity in communist societies is typically predicted to
take an unalienated or meaningful form. Schematically, we might
portray alienated labour (characteristic of capitalist
society) as: being forced; not involving self-realisation (not
developing and deploying essential human powers); not intended to
satisfy the needs of others; and not appropriately appreciated by
those others. And, schematically, we might portray unalienated or
meaningful work (characteristic of communist society) as:
being freely chosen; involving self-realisation (the development and
deployment of essential human powers); being intended to satisfy the
needs of others; and being appropriately appreciated by those
others (Kandiyali 2020). Productive activity mediates the
relationship between humankind and the natural world in both of these
societies, but alienation is found only in the former (capitalist)
case.

For an example of a view which might be said to equate objectification
with alienation, consider what is sometimes called the
‘Christian’ view of work. On this account, work is seen as
a necessary evil, an unpleasant activity unfortunately required for
our survival. It owes its name to Christianity’s embrace of the
claim that alienated work is part of the human condition: at least
since the Fall, human beings are required to work by the sweat of
their brows (see Genesis 31:9). On Marx’s account, or something
like it, one might characterise this Christian view as mistakenly
equating objectification and alienation, confusing productive activity
as such with its stunted and inhuman forms. Indeed, one might go
further and suggest that this kind of confusion reflects the alienated
social condition of humankind, embodying an emblematic failure to
understand that material production is a central realm in which human
beings can express, in free and creative ways, the kind of creatures
that they are.

In addition, according to the basic idea defended here, equating
alienation and objectification fails to appreciate that certain forms
of alienation might have nothing at all to do with productive
activity. Their mutual hostility and undisguised contempt confirm that
Gillian and her sister Hanna are alienated from each other, but there
seems little reason to assume that their estrangement is necessarily
related to the world of work or their respective place in it. The
sisters’ engagement in productive activity and the forms that it
takes, might well have nothing to do with the problematic separation
here. Imagine that the latter arose from a combination of sibling
rivalry, stubbornness, and a chance misunderstanding at a time of
family crisis involving the death of a parent. This possibility gives
us another reason not to equate alienation and objectification.

In short, neither fetishism, nor objectification, are best construed as identical with alienation. Rather than being synonymous, these concepts only partially overlap. Fetishism can be understood as picking out only a subset—on some accounts perhaps
a large subset—of cases of alienation. And there are forms of
objectification which do not involve alienation (the meaningful work
in communist societies, for instance), as well as forms of
alienation—outside of productive activity—with no obvious
connection to objectification.
3. Subjective and Objective Alienation
3.1 The Distinction Between Subject and Objective Alienation

The basic idea of alienation may not be unduly elusive or
difficult to understand. However, it obviously does not follow
that there are no complexities or slippery issues here, perhaps
especially once we venture further into the relevant literature.

Three interesting complexities are introduced here. They concern,
respectively: the distinction between subjective and objective
alienation; the need for a criterion identifying candidate separations
as problematic; and the relation between alienation and
value.

This section provides an introduction to, and some initial reflections
on, the first of these interesting complexities; namely, the division
of alienation into subjective and objective varieties (Hardimon 1994:
119–122). Not all theorists or traditions operate (either,
explicitly or implicitly) with this distinction, but it can be a
considerable help in understanding the diagnosis offered by particular
authors and in handling particular cases.

First, alienation is sometimes characterised in terms of how subjects
feel, or think about, or otherwise experience, the problematic
separation here. This can be called subjective alienation.
For instance, Ingrid might be said to be alienated because she feels
estranged from the world, because she experiences her life as lacking
meaning, because she does not feel ‘at home [zu
Hause]’ in the world—to adopt the evocative shorthand
sometimes used by Hegel—and so on (e.g. 1991a: §4A,
§187A, and §258A).

Second, alienation is sometimes characterised in terms which make no
reference to the feelings, thoughts, or experience of subjects. This
can be called objective alienation. For instance, Julieta
might be said to be alienated because some separation prevents her
from developing and deploying her essential human characteristics,
prevents her from engaging in self-realising activities, and so on.
Such claims are controversial in a variety of ways, but they assume
alienation is about the frustration of that potential, and they make
no reference to whether Julieta herself experiences that lack as a
loss. Maybe Julieta genuinely enjoys her self-realisation-lacking
life, and even consciously rejects the goal of self-realisation as
involving an overly demanding and unattractive ideal.

Subjective alienation is sometimes disparaged – treated, for example,
as concerning ‘merely’ how an individual
‘feels’ about ‘real’ alienation. However, subjective alienation is better understood as a full-blown, meaningful, variety of alienation, albeit
not the only one. If you genuinely feel alienated, then you really are
(subjectively) alienated.
3.2 Diagnostic Schema

This distinction between subjective and objective alienation can give
us a useful diagnostic schema. Let us assume—no doubt
controversially—that all combinations of these two forms of
alienation are possible. That gives us four social outcomes to
discuss:




Social

Situation:
Subjective

Alienation:
Objective

Alienation: 

(i)
◼
◼ 

(ii)
◻
◼ 

(iii)
◼
◻ 

(iv)
◻
◻  


Where: ◻ = Absent and ◼ = Present

3.3 Applications

These various alternative combinations—numbered (i) to (iv)
above—correspond, very roughly, to the ways in which particular
authors have characterised particular kinds of social arrangement or
types of society. Consider, for example, the different views of modern
class-divided society taken by Hegel and Marx.

Marx can be characterised as diagnosing contemporary capitalist
society as corresponding to situation (i); that is, as being a social
world which contains both objective and subjective alienation. On what
we might call his standard view, Marx allows that objective and
subjective alienation are conceptually distinct, but assumes that in
capitalist societies they are typically found together sociologically
(perhaps with the subjective forms tending to track the objective
ones). However, there are passages where he deviates from that
standard view, and—without abandoning the thought that objective
alienation is, in some sense, more fundamental—appears to allow
that, on occasion, subjective and objective alienation can also come
apart sociologically. At least, that is one way of reading a
well-known passage in The Holy Family which suggests that
capitalists might be objectively but not subjectively alienated. In
these remarks, Marx recognises that capitalists do not get to engage
in self-realising activities of the right kind (hence their objective
alienation), but observes that—unlike the proletariat—the
capitalists are content in their estrangement; not least,
they feel ‘at ease’ in it, and they feel
‘strengthened’ by it (Marx and Engels 1975: 36).

In contrast, Hegel maintains that the modern social world approximates
to something more like situation (iii); that is, as being a social
world not containing objective alienation, but still containing
subjective alienation. That is, for Hegel, the social and political
structures of the modern social world do constitute a home, because
they enable individuals to realise themselves, variously as family
members, economic agents, and citizens. However, those same
individuals fail to understand or appreciate that this is the case,
and rather feel estranged from, and perhaps even consciously reject,
the institutions of the modern social world. The resulting situation
has been characterised as one of ‘pure subjective
alienation’ (Hardimon 1994: 121).

That Hegel and Marx diagnose modern society in these different ways
helps to explain their differing strategic political commitments. They
both aim to bring society closer to situation (iv)—that is, a
social world lacking systematic forms of both objective and subjective
alienation—but, since they disagree about where we are starting
from, they propose different routes to that shared goal. For Marx,
since we start from situation (i), this requires that the existing
world be overturned; that is, that both institutions and attitudes
need to be revolutionised (overcoming objective and subjective
alienation). For Hegel, since we start from situation (iii), this
requires only attitudinal change: we come to recognise that the
existing world is already objectively ‘a home’, and in
this way ‘reconcile’ ourselves to that world, overcoming
pure subjective alienation in the process.

Situation (ii) consists of a social world containing objective, but
not subjective, alienation – a situation that can be characterised as
one of ‘pure objective alienation’ (Hardimon
1994: 120). It is perhaps not too much of a stretch to think of
this situation as corresponding, very roughly, to one of the Frankfurt
School’s more nightmarish visions of contemporary capitalist
society. (The Frankfurt School is the colloquial label given to
several generations of philosophers and social theorists, in the
Western Marxist tradition, associated—more or less
closely—with the Institute for Social Research founded in
1929–1930.) For example, in the pessimistic diagnosis of Herbert
Marcuse (1898–1979), articulated in One-Dimensional Man
(1964), individuals in advanced capitalist societies appear happy in
their dysfunctional relationships—they ‘identify
themselves’ with their estranged circumstances and gain
‘satisfaction’ from them (2002: 13). Objective alienation
still obtains, but no longer generates social conflict, since the
latter is assumed—not implausibly—to require agents who
feel, or experience, some form of hostility or rebelliousness towards
existing social arrangements.

That latter assumption raises the wider issue of the relation between
alienation and, what might be called ‘revolutionary
motivation’. Let us assume that radical social change requires,
amongst other conditions, an agent—typically a collective
agent—with both the strength and the desire to bring that change
about. The role of alienation in helping to form that latter
psychological prerequisite—the desire to bring about change on
the part of the putative revolutionary agent—looks complicated.
First, it would seem that the mere fact of objective alienation cannot play
the motivating role, since it does not involve or require any feeling,
or thinking about, or otherwise experiencing, the problematic
separation here. It remains possible, of course, that a subject’s knowledge of that alienation
might—depending, not least, on one’s views on the
connections between reasons and motivations—provide an
appropriately psychological incentive to revolt. Second, the relation
between subjective alienation and motivation looks more complex than
it might initially seem. Note, in particular, that some of the
experiential dimensions of subjective alienation look less likely than
others to generate the psychological prerequisites of action here.
Feelings of powerlessness and isolation, for instance, might well
generate social withdrawal and individual atomism, rather than radical
social engagement and cooperative endeavour, on the part of the
relevant agents. In short, whether subjective alienation is a friend
or an enemy of revolutionary motivation would seem to depend on the
precise form that it takes.

Interestingly, situation (ii)—that is, the case of ‘pure
objective alienation’—might also be thought to approximate
to the social goal of certain thinkers in the tradition of
existentialism (the tradition of Jean-Paul Sartre (1905–1980),
Albert Camus (1913–1960), and others). Some interpretative
generosity may be needed here, but existentialists appear to think of (something like) objective alienation as a permanent feature of all human societies. Rejecting both substantive accounts of essential human nature, and the ethical embrace of social relations
that facilitate the development and deployment of those human
characteristics, they rather maintain that the social world will
always remain ‘other’, can never be a ‘home’.
However, although this ‘otherness’ can never be overcome,
there do look to be better and worse ways of dealing with it. What is
essential to each individual is what they make of themselves, the ways
in which they choose to engage with that other. The preferred outcome
here seems to involve individuals embodying a norm of
‘authenticity’, which amongst other conditions—such
as choosing, or committing, to their own projects—may require
that they have the ‘courage’ to ‘grasp, accept, and,
perhaps even affirm’ the fact that the social world is not a
home for them (Hardimon 1994: 121).

This also clarifies that situation (iv)—which contains
systematic forms of neither objective or subjective
alienation—is the social goal of some but not all of these
authors (of Hegel and Marx, for instance, but not the
existentialists). Of course, (iv) might also be a characterisation of
the extant social world according to a hypothetical, and
over-optimistic, apologist for the present.
4. What Makes a Separation Problematic?
4.1 Criteria of ‘Impropriety’

The second of the interesting complexities broached here concerns what
we can call the need for a criterion of
‘impropriety’ – that is, a criterion by which candidate
separations might be identified as problematic or not. Recall the
earlier suggestion that accounts of alienation require some benchmark
condition of harmony or connectedness against which separations might
be assessed as problematic or not.

Historically, this role—identifying whether candidate
separations are problematic—has often been played by accounts of
our essential human nature. However, motivated by suspicion of that
latter idea, theorists of alienation have sometimes sought
alternatives to fulfil that role.
4.2 Essential Human Nature

To see how the appeal to human nature works, imagine two hypothetical
theorists—Katerina and Laura—seeking to assess whether
alienation exists in a particular society. We can stipulate that the
institutions and culture of this particular society are
individualistic—in the sense that they systematically frustrate
cooperation and sociability—and that the two theorists share
many, but not all, of the same views. In particular, assume that our
two theorists agree that: alienation is a coherent and useful
concept; the account of alienation given here is, broadly
speaking, plausible; the only serious candidate for a problematic
separation in this particular society are those arising from its
individualism; and our essential human nature provides the
benchmark of ‘propriety’ for assessing separations. Simply
put, separations are problematic if they frustrate, and unproblematic
if they facilitate, ‘self-realisation’. Self-realisation
is understood here as a central part of the good life and as
consisting in the development and deployment of an individual’s
essential human characteristics. However, assume also that Katerina
and Laura disagree about what comprises human nature. In
particular, they disagree about whether cooperation and sociability
are essential human characteristics, with Katerina insisting that they
are and Laura insisting that they are not. It seems to follow that
Katerina will conclude, and Laura will deny, that this society is one
containing alienation. For Katerina, the widespread lack of
cooperation and sociability confirm that the basic social institutions
here frustrate our self-realisation. For Laura, the very same
widespread lack of cooperation and sociability confirm that the basic
social institutions facilitate, or at least do not
frustrate, our self-realisation.

Note that in sub-section 1.2, where the basic idea of alienation was
elaborated, various relations between subject and object were
distinguished, only one of which was characterised as reflexive.
However, in the light of the present discussion, we might now think it
more accurate to say that—on this kind of account, which
uses our essential human nature to identify alienation—only
one of them was directly reflexive, because there is some
sense in which all of those dimensions of alienation involve a
separation from some aspect of our own human nature. After all, this
is precisely what picks out the relevant separation as problematic.
For example, the separation of individuals from each other is, for
Katerina, indirectly also a separation from human nature, from the
cooperation and sociability that characterises our essential
humanity.
4.3 An Alternative Criterion

As already noted, this benchmark—by which candidate separations
are assessed as problematic or not—is often, but not always,
played by accounts of our essential human nature. Given the widespread
contemporary suspicion of such accounts—not least, by those
opposed to what is sometimes called ‘essentialism’ about
human nature—it might be helpful to sketch a recent account
of alienation which is not dependent on such assumptions (or, at
least, consciously strives to avoid them). There is also a potential
benefit here for those of us who do not fully share that suspicion,
namely, that such an example might provide some sense of the
diversity of available theories of alienation.

Rahel Jaeggi offers an account of alienation of this kind, and
situates it explicitly in the tradition of Critical Theory – the kind
of emancipatory theory associated with the Frankfurt School. On this
account, the idea of alienation has the potential to help us
understand and change the world, but only if it receives some
significant conceptual reconstruction. Alienation is still associated
with the frustration of freedom, with disruptions to something like
‘self-realisation’. However, this account—unlike its
forerunners and associates—is said not to be fatally compromised
by a commitment to either ‘strongly objectivistic’
theories of the good life or ‘essentialist’ conceptions of
the self (Jaeggi 2014: 40).

The crucial term of art here is ‘appropriation’, which
Jaeggi uses to refer to the capacity for, and process of, relating to
our own actions and projects in ways which engage ‘something
like self-determination and being the author of one’s own
life’  (2014: 39). Appropriation is successful—and
alienation is absent—when ‘one is present in one’s
actions, steers one’s life instead of being driven by it,
independently appropriates social roles and is able to identify with
one’s desires, and is involved in the world’ (Jaeggi 2014:
155). In contrast, appropriation is unsuccessful—and alienation
is present—when there is ‘an inadequate power and a lack
of presence in what one does, a failure to identify with one’s
own actions and desires and to take part in one’s own
life’ (Jaeggi 2014: 155). Alienation is thus identified with
systematic disruptions of the process of appropriation – in particular,
in those systematic disruptions which lead us to fail to experience
our actions and projects as our own. These disruptions are said
typically to take one of four forms: first,
‘powerlessness’ or the experience of losing control over
one’s own life; second, ‘loss of authenticity’
especially when one is unable to identify with one’s own social
roles; third, ‘internal division’ where one experiences
some of one’s own desires and impulses as alien; and fourth,
‘indifference’ or a detachment from one’s own
previous projects and self-understandings.

This model fits happily enough with our basic idea of alienation as
consisting in a  problematic separation between self and other
that belong together. However, the conditions for identifying
the relevant dysfunctional relation here are intended to be less
demanding and controversial than those involving claims about our
essential human nature. There is a kindred notion of freedom as
self-realisation, but it is said to be the realisation of a thin kind
of self-determining agency and not the actualisation of some thick
‘pre-given’ identity of an essentialist sort. A normative
dimension remains, but it is presented as expansive and broadly
procedural. It is expansive in that a wide range of actions and
projects might be included within its remit. And it is procedural in
that the benchmark for judging the success of these various actions
and projects is that they were brought about in the right kind of
self-determination delivering way, and not that their content reflects
a narrow and controversial account of what human beings are ‘in
essence’.

Modern culture is said to recognise and value the kind of freedom at
the heart of this picture of appropriation. As a result, this account
of alienation can be presented as a form of immanent
critique – that is, as utilising a standpoint which judges
individuals and forms of life according to standards that those
individuals have themselves propounded or which those forms of life
presuppose. At the individual level, this critique might involve
identifying potential tensions between the conditions for treating
people as responsible agents, and the obstructions to such agency that
characterise alienated selves – for instance, the feelings of
powerlessness that prevent individuals from directing and embracing
their own lives. And at the social level, this critique might involve
identifying potential discrepancies between modern ideals of freedom
and their actual realisation in the contemporary world – for instance,
the existence of social or political roles that an individual can
never make their own (Jaeggi 2014: 41–42).

Of course, there remain questions about this account, and three are
broached here. First, one might doubt whether the contrast between
essentialist accounts of human nature, on the one hand, and a thinner
kind of self-governing agency, on the other, can either be sustained
or play the role intended. Second, one might wonder about the
ground(s) of normativity; after all, that the kind of subjectivity or
self-determination which appropriation embodies is recognised and
valued in modern culture does not in itself establish its ethical
worth. (More generally, it can seem easier to dismiss Hegelian
teleology, or Marxist perfectionism, than it is to find wholly
satisfactory replacements for them.) Third, one might be sceptical
about the degree of social criticism here, since both the sources of,
and solutions to, Jaeggi’s paradigmatic examples of
unsuccessful appropriation (‘powerless’, ‘loss
of authenticity’, ‘internal division’,
and ‘indifference’) seem to focus on the
‘thoughts and dispositions’ of individuals rather than the
structures of particular societies (Haverkamp 2016, 69). Of course,
there might be plausible responses to these critical worries, some
of which could draw on Jaeggi’s own subsequent work
(see espcially 2018). 
5. Alienation and Value
5.1 Negative Element

The third of these interesting complexities concerns the ethical
dimension of alienation. The connections between alienation and ethics
are many and diverse, and there is no attempt here to sketch that
wider landscape in its entirety. Instead, attention is drawn to two
topographical features: the claim that alienation is necessarily a
negative, but not a wholly negative, phenomenon, is elaborated and
defended; and the suggestion that some forms of moral theory or even
morality itself might encourage or embody alienation is briefly
outlined.

The claim that alienation is necessarily a negative, but not a wholly
negative, phenomenon can be addressed in two parts. Defending the
first part of that claim looks straightforward enough. Alienation, on
the present account, consists in the separation of certain entities
– a subject and some object—that properly belong together.
As a result, alienation always involves a loss or lack of something of
value, namely, the ‘proper’—rational, natural, or
good—harmony or connectedness between the relevant subject and
object. 
5.2 Positive Element

It is the second part of the claim which looks less obvious: that
alienation is not a wholly negative phenomena, that is, that the loss
or lack here may not always be the whole story, ethically speaking.
Note, in particular, that some well-known accounts also locate an
achievement of something of value in the moment of alienation. The resulting ethical
‘gains’ and ‘losses’ would then need to be weighed and
judged overall.

In order to illustrate this possibility—that alienation can
involve the achievement of something of value—consider the
nuanced and critical celebration of capitalism found, but not always
recognised, in Marx’s writings. One pertinent way of introducing
this account involves locating the moment of alienation within a
pattern of development that we might call ‘dialectical’ in
one sense of that slippery term.

The dialectical pattern here concerns the developing relationship
between a particular subject and object: the individual, on the one
hand, and their social role and community, on the other. By a
dialectical progression is meant only a movement from a stage
characterised by a relationship of ‘undifferentiated
unity’, through a stage characterised by a relationship of
‘differentiated disunity’, to a stage characterised by a
relationship of ‘differentiated unity’.
There are no further claims made here about the necessity, the naturalness, or the
prevalence, of such progressions (Cohen 1974: 237).

The dialectical progression here involves three historical
stages:

First, past (pre-capitalist) societies are said to
embody undifferentiated unity. In this stage, individuals
are buried in their social role and community, scarcely
conceptualising, still less promoting, their own identity and
interests as distinguishable from those of the wider community.

Second, present (capitalist) societies are said to
embody differentiated disunity. In this stage, independence
and separation predominate, and individuals care only for themselves,
scarcely thinking of the identity and interests of the wider
community. Indeed, they are typically isolated from, and indifferent
or even hostile towards, the latter.

Third, future (communist) societies are said to
embody differentiated unity. In this stage, desirable
versions of community and individuality flourish together. Indeed, in
their new forms, communal and individual identities and communal and
individual interests presuppose and reinforce each other. It is
sometimes said that the contents of the first two stages (community
and individuality, respectively) have thereby been
‘sublated’—that is, elevated, cancelled, and
preserved—in this third stage. ‘Sublated’ is an
attempted English translation of the German verb
‘aufheben’and its cognates, which Hegel
occasionally uses to suggest this elusive combination of ideas (e.g.
Hegel 1991b: §24A3, §81A1).

In the present context, the crucial historical stage is the second
one. This is the stage of alienation, the stage of disunity which
emerges from a simple unity before reconciliation in a higher
(differentiated) unity (Inwood 1992: 36). This is the stage associated
with present (capitalist) societies involving the problematic
separation of individuals from their social role and community. In the
first historical stage (of past pre-capitalist societies) there is a
problematic relation, but no separation. And in the third historical
stage (of future communist societies) there is a separation but it is
a healthy rather than problematic one. In this second historical stage
of alienation, there is a loss, or lack, of something of value;
roughly speaking, it is the loss or lack of the individuals’
attachment to their social role and community. (More precisely, we
might say that they have lost a sense of, and connection to, the
community, and that they lack a healthy sense of, and connection to,
the community.)

However, this disvalue is not the whole of the historical story,
ethically speaking. In comparison with the first stage, the second
stage also involves a liberation of sorts from the object in which
subjects were previously ‘engulfed’ (Cohen 1974: 239). The
‘of sorts’ is a way of acknowledging that this is a rather
distinctive kind of liberation. The individual here is not necessarily
rid of the constraints of the other (of their social position and
community), but they do now at least identify and experience them as
such—that is, as constraints on the individual—whereas
previously the individual was engulfed by that other and failed to
think of themselves as having any identity and interests outside of
their social position. In short, the loss or lack of something of
value is not the only feature of the second stage of alienation. There
is also an important gain here, namely, the achievement of what we can
call ‘individuality’. This significant good was missing in
the first pre-capitalist stage, and—freed from its present
distorting capitalist form—it will be preserved and developed in
the communist future of the third historical stage.

This claim goes beyond the familiar suggestion that alienation forms a
necessary step in certain Hegelian and Marxist developmental
narratives. The suggestion here is that internal to the second stage,
the stage of alienation, there is both a problematic separation from
community and a positive liberation from engulfment. Those who see
only the negative thread in alienation, and fail to see ‘what is
being achieved within in and distorted by it’, will miss an
important, albeit subtle, thread in Marx’s account of the
progressive character of capitalism (Cohen 1974: 253).

There is a lot going on in this schematic discussion of historical
stages. The point emphasised here is that theorists—even
critics—of alienation need not assume that it is a wholly
negative phenomena, ethically speaking. Marx, for example, recognises
that the moment of alienation, for all its negative features, also
involves the emergence of a good (individuality), which, in due course
(and freed from the limitations of its historical origins), will be
central to the human flourishing achieved in communist
society.
5.3 Morality as Alienating

This claim—that alienation might not be a wholly negative
phenomenon—concerns the normative dimensions of alienation.
However, it is sometimes suggested that the concept of alienation
might provide a standpoint from which morality itself, or at least
some forms of it, can be criticised. This looks to be a very
different kind of thought.

The broad suggestion is that morality, or certain conceptions of
morality, might embody, or encourage, alienation. More precisely,
morality, or certain conceptions of morality, might embody or
encourage a problematic division of self and a problematic separation
from much that is valuable in our lives. Consider, for example,
accounts of the moral standpoint as requiring universalisation and
equal consideration of all persons (Railton 1984: 138). It could seem
that adopting such a standpoint requires individuals to disown or
downplay the relevance of their more personal or partial (as opposed to impartial) beliefs and
feelings. The picture of persons divided into cognitive and affective
parts, with the partial and personal relegated to the downgraded
sphere of the latter (perhaps conceptualised as something closer to
mere sentiment than reason) is a familiar one. In addition to that
problematic bifurcation of the self, such accounts might seem to cut
us off from much that is valuable in our lives. If these impersonal
kinds of moral consideration are to dominate our practical reasoning,
then it seems likely that an individual’s particular
attachments, loyalties, and commitments will have, at best, a marginal
place (Railton 1984: 139). In aspiring to adopt ‘the point of
view of the universe’—to use the well-known phrase of
Henry Sidgwick (1838–1900) – there can sometimes seem to
be precious little security or space remaining for, say, friendship,
love, and family (Sidgwick 1907: 382). So understood, morality, or
certain conceptions of morality, are charged with embodying and
encouraging alienation in the form of both a divided self, and a
separation of self and world.

The weight and scope of these kinds of concerns about alienation
can obviously vary; that is, they might be thought to have more or
less critical purchase on a wider or narrower range of targets. There
are various possibilities here. These concerns might, for
example, be said to apply: first, only to certain kinds of personality
types inclined to adopt particular moral theories, and not to the
theories themselves (Piper 1987); second, only to certain ways of
formulating particular moral theories (the objections here being
overcome by a more adequate formulation of
the particular theories in question); third, only to particular
moral theories (such as act utilitarianism, certain forms of
consequentialism, or all impartial moral theories) to which they
constitute foundational objections (but not to morality as such);
and, fourth, as a foundational objection that counts
against ‘the peculiar institution’ of morality itself
(Williams 1985: 174). Given both that variety and the subject matter
of this entry, it may not be helpful to generalise much more here.
However, the point is hopefully made that the ethical dimensions of
the present topic extend beyond the normative assessment of the
relevant separations. Indeed, taking alienation seriously might lead
us to think more critically about some familiar moral standpoints and
theories.
6. Some (Unresolved) Empirical Issues
6.1 Content

The above discussion of the concept of alienation—clarifying its
basic shape, sketching some of its theoretical forms, and introducing
a few complexities—still leaves many issues unresolved.
These include many empirical and quasi-empirical issues. The
present section is concerned with some of the
empirical assumptions and claims that appear in what might be
called broadly philosophical accounts of alienation of the kind
discussed above. It is not directly concerned with the extensive
social scientific literature on alienation. That latter
literature is often preoccupied
with ‘operationalising’ the concept—for
instance, treating job satisfaction or absenteeism as proxies of
alienated work—in order to engineer predictive models in
disciplines (including education, psychology, sociology, and
management studies) dealing with a variety of real world contexts
(see e.g. Chiaburu et al 2014).

As an example of some of the empirical dimensions of broadly
philosophical accounts of alienation, consider Marx’s
characterisation of capitalist society as characterised by
separations which frustrate self-realisation, especially
self-realisation in work. To come to a considered judgement about the
plausibility of his views on this topic, one would have to be in a
position to assess, amongst other issues, whether work in capitalist
societies is necessarily alienated. One would need to judge not only
whether existing work is rightly characterised as alienated (as
forced, frustrating self-realisation, not intended to satisfy the
needs of others, and not appropriately appreciated by those others),
but also, if so, whether it could be made meaningful and unalienated
without undermining the very features which made the relevant society
a capitalist one. (There are, of course, also many more
normative-looking issues here regarding that account of human
flourishing: whether, for example, Marx overestimates the value of
creative and fulfilling work, and underestimates the value of,
say, leisure and intellectual excellence.) Reaching anything like a
considered judgment on these empirical and quasi-empirical issues
would clearly require some complicated factual assessments of, amongst
other issues, the composition and functioning of human nature and the
extant social world.
6.2 Extent

A range of complex empirical and quasi-empirical issues also look to
be woven into Marx’s views about the historical extent of
alienation. Consider the various claims about the
historical location and comparative intensity of alienation that can
be found in his writings (and in certain secondary
interpretations of those writings). These include: first, that
certain systematic forms of alienation—including alienation in
work—are not a universal feature of human society (not least,
they will not be a feature of a future communist order); second, that
at least some systematic forms of alienation—presumably
including the alienation that Marx identifies as embodied in religious belief —are widespread in pre-capitalist
societies; and third, that systematic forms of alienation are greater
in contemporary capitalist societies than in pre-capitalist
societies. There seems no good textual or theoretical reason to
lumber Marx with the view that less systematic forms of alienation—such as the hypothetical estrangement of Gillian from her sister Hanna (which arose from sibling rivalry, stubbornness, and a chance misunderstanding at a time of family crisis)—could never exist under communism.

Take the last of these assorted empirical claims attributed to Marx – the comparative
verdict about the extent or intensity of systematic forms of alienation in capitalist
societies. Its plausibility is scarcely incontrovertible given the
amount of sheer productive drudgery, and worse, in pre-capitalist
societies. Nor is it obvious how one might attempt to substantiate the
empirical dimensions of the claim. The empirical difficulties of
measuring subjective alienation look considerable enough (especially
given the limitations of historical data), but alienation for Marx is
fundamentally about the frustration of objective human potentials,
those separations that prevent self-realisation, perhaps especially
self-realisation in work. One suggestion, made in this context, is
that the scale of alienation in a particular society might be
indicated by the gap between the liberating potential of human
productive powers, on the one hand, and the extent to which that
potential is reflected in the lives actually lived by producers, on
the other (Wood 2004: 44–48). Whatever the appeal of that
suggestion, the social scientific details of how one might actually
apply that kind of measure in particular historical cases remain
unclear.
6.3 Prognosis

Related worries might also apply to claims about the prognosis for
alienation, in particular, about whether and how alienation might be
overcome. Consider, for instance, Marx’s view that communist
society will be free of certain systematic forms of alienation, such
as alienation in work. Marx’s view about communism rests crucially on the judgement that it is the social relations of
capitalist society, and not its material or technical arrangements,
which are the cause of systematic forms of alienation. For instance,
he holds that it is not the existence of science, technology, and
industrialisation, as such, which are at the root of the social and
psychological ills of alienation, but rather how those factors tend to
be organised and used in a capitalist society. (For present
purposes, just assume that a society is capitalist when its
economic structure is based on a particular class division – in
which producers can only access means of production by selling their
labour power—and when production, and much else, is driven
by a remorseless search for profit.) In volume one of
Capital, Marx writes approvingly of workers who, through time
and experience, had learnt ‘to distinguish between machinery and
its employment by capital, and to direct their attacks, not against
the material instruments of production, but against the mode in which
they are used’ (1996: 432). If this had not been his view, Marx
could not have, consistently, also suggested that communist society
– which, on his account, is similarly technologically advanced
and industrial—could avoid this kind of alienation. This
suggestion is, nonetheless, strikingly sanguine. Marx is confident,
for instance, that the considerable gulf between the gloomy results of
adopting machinery in the capitalist present (where it increases the
repetitiveness of tasks, narrows talents, promotes
‘deskilling’, and so on) and the bright promise of its
adoption in the communist future (where it will liberate us from
uncreative tasks, create greater wealth, develop all-round abilities,
and so on) is easily bridged. However, Marx’s
‘utopophobia’—that is, his reluctance to say very
much, in any close detail, about the future shape of socialist
society – prevents him from offering any serious discussion
about how precisely this might be done (Leopold 2016). As a result,
even the mildest of sceptics could reasonably worry that a range of
difficult empirical and other questions are evaded rather than
answered here.

This issue—whether, and to what extent, alienation can be
overcome in modern societies—is sometimes conflated with the
issue of whether, and to what extent, alienation is a historically
universal phenomena. To see that these are distinct questions,
imagine that alienation only emerges in economically developed
societies, that it is a necessary feature of economically developed
societies, and that economically developed societies never revert
voluntarily to economically undeveloped ones. These are not
implausible claims, but together they seem to entail that, although
only a subset of historical societies are scarred by
alienation, if you happen to live in an economically developed
society, then—involuntary Armageddon apart—alienation will
remain the fate of you and your successors.

My aim here is not to make significant progress in resolving any of
these empirical and quasi-empirical issues, but rather to
acknowledge their existence and extent. Since the concept of
alienation diagnoses a complex range of social ills involving self and
other, it is perhaps not surprising that a variety of such issues
are implicated in these various accounts of its proper
characterisation, its historical scope, and the possibilities for
overcoming it. Nonetheless, it remains important to acknowledge the
existence and complexity of these empirical and quasi-empirical
threads, not least because they are not always adequately recognised
or dealt with in the broadly philosophical discussions of alienation
which are the focus of the discussion here. 


====================================================================================================
TITLE: Ancient Political Philosophy
====================================================================================================
TOC:



1. The Scope of Ancient Political Philosophy
2. Politics and Philosophy in Ancient Greece

2.1 Politics and Justice
2.2 Politics, Justice, and Equality
2.3 Politics and Philosophy


3. Socrates and Plato

3.1 Socratic Ethics and Politics
3.2 Socrates’ Trial: The Political Philosophy of Citizenship
3.3 The Defense of Justice in the Republic
3.4 The Definition of Political Knowledge in the Statesman
3.5 The “Second-Best” Regime of the Laws


4. Aristotle

4.1 Aristotle’s Philosophical Method and Ethics
4.2 Ethics and Politics by Way of Law
4.3 Claims to Rule
4.4 Aristotle in Political Philosophy


5. Hellenistic Philosophies and Politics

5.1 Persisting and New Schools
5.2 Epicureanism
5.3 Stoicism
5.4 Hellenistic Philosophies and Roman Republican Politics


6. The Roman Republic and Cicero

6.1 Cicero: Life
6.2 De re publica
6.3 De legibus
6.4 De officiis


7. Political Philosophy in the Roman Empire

7.1 Later Stoicism
7.2 Platonisms and Other Philosophies in the Empire


8. Conclusion
Bibliography

Primary Literature
Secondary Literature


Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries





TEXT:

1. The Scope of Ancient Political Philosophy

We find the etymological origins of two key terms in the title of this
article, “political” and “philosophy”, in
ancient Greek: the former originally pertaining to the polis
or city-state; the latter being the practice of a particular kind of
inquiry conceived literally as the “love of wisdom”
(philosophia). These ideas were transmitted beyond the
confines of the classical polis as the Greek city-states came
under the suzerainty of larger kingdoms after an initial Macedonian
conquest at the end of the fourth century B.C; those kingdoms in turn
were eventually conquered and significantly assimilated by the Roman
republic, later transmuted into an empire. Philosophers writing in
Latin engaged self-consciously with the earlier and continuing
traditions of writing about philosophy in Greek. Already from its
origins, Greek political philosophy put the question of the forms of
regimes or “constitutions” (politeia, singular)
at the center of its concerns. The classification of types of
constitutions already found in Herodotus, fleshed out by Plato, and
further adapted by Aristotle—in Aristotle’s version,
there were three “good” regimes, namely, monarchy,
aristocracy, and a moderate form of democracy, as well as their three
“perversions,” namely tyranny, oligarchy, and a bad form of
democracy—would continue to inform the discussion of politics
into the context of the “mixed regime” of the Roman
republic, held to combine elements of all three of the good regimes.
These discussions were indexed to the particular historical setting
under consideration while also offering general principles that remain
relevant in many ways, even as the questions and contexts for
political philosophy have changed.

Because the field of political philosophy so delineated has had a long
history since then, long past the time when the ancient models were
accepted as defining the field and determining the
“problems” to be considered, it is a mistake to approach
their thought with a modern menu of expectations of what the subject
will contain. At the same time, because the Greeks also developed
other genres widely recognized today—among them, history,
tragedy, comedy, and rhetoric—no understanding of their thought
about politics can restrict itself to the genre of political
philosophy alone. Some argue, for example, that Thucydides’
elaboration of the nature of the political through his
History of the fifth-century Peloponnesian War between
leagues led by Athens and Sparta is more important and instructive
than that issuing from Plato’s philosophical dialogues (Geuss
2005). While that argument is contentious, it rests on an important
broader point. “Politics” and what is
“political” emerged as part of a widespread set of
sociolinguistic practices, most notably and best documented in Athens,
while “philosophy” was invented by a relatively small
number of self-professed “philosophical” thinkers. Thus
the invention of “political philosophy” as a genre can be
understood as a deliberate challenge to existing practices, and
conceptions, of “the political.” The challenge was
directed in particular, though not exclusively, to democratic
practices in mid to late fifth century Athens, which was the
polis both intellectually dominant and in many ways
politically exemplary at the time, as well as bequeathing the
lion’s share of our surviving evidence from ancient Greece
(Meier 1990, Ober 2008; on the surviving evidence for ancient Greek
philosophy in general, see the entry on
 doxography for ancient philosophy).

This article therefore begins by surveying political practices and the
reflective accounts to which they gave rise in the classical Greek
period of the independent polis. It then turns to the
thinkers who invented “political philosophy” par
excellence: Socrates, Plato and Aristotle. It continues to Hellenistic
Greek thinkers before considering the main currents and roles of
political philosophy in the Roman republic. While offering a survey of
certain developments in the Roman empire, it leaves aside the
distinctive contributions made by Jewish and Christian thinkers in
that period, and in particular the great upheaval of thought effected
by Augustine, who was deeply engaged with classical authors such as
Plato and Cicero, who became in turn a crucial starting point for
 medieval political philosophy.
 The article concludes with some reflections on how the nature of
“ancient political philosophy” should, and should not, be
understood.
2. Politics and Philosophy in Ancient Greece
2.1 Politics and Justice

The distinctive understanding of “politics” forged in
Greece was marked by the historical emergence of the independent
 city-state[1]
 and the variety of regimes which it could harbor. Notwithstanding
fantasies of a pre-political “Age of Kronos”, the
polis was widely understood as the acme of human civilization
and the principal domain in which human fulfillment could be sought.
The city was the domain of potential collaboration in leading the good
life, though it was by the same token the domain of potential
contestation should that pursuit come to be understood as pitting some
against others. Political theorizing began in arguments about what
politics was good for, who could participate in politics, and why,
arguments which were tools in civic battles for ideological and
material control as well as attempts to provide logical or
architectonic frameworks for those battles.

Such conflicts were addressed by the idea of justice, which was
fundamental to the city as it emerged from the archaic age into the
classical period. Justice was conceived by poets, lawgivers, and
philosophers alike as the structure of civic bonds which were
beneficial to all (rich and poor, powerful and weak alike) rather than
an exploitation of some by others. Hesiod’s late eighth-century
epic poem Works and Days, for example, contrasts the brute
strength with which a hawk can dominate a nightingale (“You are
being held by one who is much stronger… I will make a meal of
you, if I want, or let you go,” lines 206–208), with the
peace and plenty which flourishes wherever justice, such as rendering
fair verdicts to foreigners, is preserved (lines 225–230).

So understood, justice defined the basis of equal citizenship and was
said to be the requirement for human regimes to be acceptable to the
gods. The ideal was that, with justice as a foundation, political life
would enable its participants to flourish and to achieve the
overarching human end of happiness (eudaimonia), expressing a
civic form of virtue and pursuing happiness and success through the
competitive forums of the city. Whether justice applied to the
city’s relation with other cities was a further and highly
contested point, memorably explored in Thucydides’ recounting of
the “Melian Dialogue” in 416 BCE, in which emissaries of
the Athenians debated the meaning of justice with the leaders of the
island-city of Melos, a city they were threatening with death and
disaster should they fail to submit to Athenian imperial demands
(Thuc. V. 84–114).
2.2 Politics, Justice, and Equality

Justice, then, depended on treating equals equally, and distributing
citizenship and the privileges of officeholding accordingly. Yet how
should “the equal” be understood? This became the major
political faultline of the Greek fifth century BCE. Oligarchical
regimes might consider only the
 kalokagathoi[2]—the 
 elite and well-born, usually also wealthy landowners
—to be full equals; democratic regimes, by contrast, tended to
treat the “many” (or some large proportion of them) as
political equals of the elite “few,” in the fullest
democracies enfranchising all free- and native-born
 men.[3]
 Sparta, a unique political entity, still exemplified the same broad
pattern in naming its citizens “the equals” or (more
literally) “the peers” (hoi
 homoioi).[4]
 The absence of slave status made one free but not necessarily a
citizen. Slavery for its part was little discussed as an explicit
political question, though Aristotle recognized that the question of
its justice or injustice had indeed been raised at least in
theoretical debate and needed to be addressed, which he did himself by
sketching out a kind of slavery that could in principle (so he
claimed) be just by nature (see 4.3 below; Garnsey 1996 on slavery in
Greek thought from Aristotle to Augustine). The exclusion of women
from active citizenship in Athens was more consciously felt, giving
rise to fantasies of female-dominated politics in Aristophanic comedy
(Lysistrata, Assemblywomen) and to tortured
reflection in many tragedies (consider the titles of Medea
and Trojan Women, both Athenian works setting explorations of
women’s roles in the dramatic contexts of archaic foreign
polities).

Among equals, however defined, the space of the political was the
space of participation in decision-making concerning public affairs
and actions. That invention of the political (what Meier 1990 calls
The Greek Discovery of Politics) was the hallmark of the
classical Greek world. Citizens, whether the few (usually the rich) or
the many (including the poorer and perhaps the poorest free adult
men), gathered together to conduct public affairs, sharing either by
custom, by election, or by lot—the latter seen in Athens as the
most democratic, though it was never the sole mechanism used in any
Greek democracy—in holding, or holding accountable, the offices
for carrying them out. Rhetoric played an important role in shaping
those decisions, especially, though not only, in democracies, where
discursive norms shaped by the poor majority were hegemonic in public
even over the rich (Ober 1989).

At the same time, politics was shaped by the legacy of archaic poetry
and its heroic ethos and by the religious cults which included,
alongside pan-Hellenic and familial rites, important practices
distinct to each city-state. This was a polytheistic, rather than
monotheistic, setting, in which religion was at least in large part a
function of civic identity. It was a world innocent of modern
bureaucracy and of the modern move to intellectual abstraction in
defining the state: the entity we would call “Athens” in
the abstract was called in its own day by the collective noun for its
living and breathing citizens, “the Athenians.” So if
ancient political philosophy left out much that modern political
philosophy would include (e.g., for the most part, the question of the
justness of slavery), it also included much that the latter would tend
to exclude. Not only the civic religious cult, but also the patterns
of child-rearing, cultural stories expressed in music, epic, and
drama, gender roles and sexual practices, military participation, and
so on, were features of the “way of life” which
constituted the politeia or “constitution” in its
broadest sense (Lane 2014a, 59–62). This broadest sense was
initially most evident to the Athenians when they looked at the
peculiar customs of Sparta, but Plato taught them to recognize that
democratic Athens was as distinctive a regime (Schofield 2006:
31–43), one embodying a particular set of ethical goals and
practices in its political arrangements.

Most of those generally recognized as “wise men”
(sophoi) and “students of nature”
(physikoi) who appeared in this milieu, thought within the
same broad terms as the poets and orators. Justice was widely, if not
universally, treated as a fundamental constituent of cosmic order.
Some of the physikoi influenced political life, notably a
number of the Pythagoreans in southern Italy. Others held themselves
aloof from political action while still identifying commonalities or
consonances between nature and politics, for example, Democritus of
Abdera, whose atomist philosophy comported with a defense of political
life, and so of the justice that it required individuals to enact, as
being necessary for individual flourishing (see e.g. Democritus’
fragment DK B252 = Taylor D116). However, these portraits of broad
consonance between nature and politics were challenged in the mid to
late fifth century BCE by some among a new breed of thinker and actor,
the professional teachers (“sophists”), who began to ask
whether the laws and customs (nomos, singular;
nomoi, plural) embodying political justice were truly a
reflection of justice in nature (phusis), or merely an
imposition of arbitrary human norms. Most of the sophists argued the
latter, though they did so along a spectrum of interpretation (for
which our evidence rests heavily on Plato, who portrays Socrates
arguing with a considerable number of sophists): for example, for
Protagoras (an itinerant teacher from Abdera who is depicted in
Plato’s Protagoras and Theaetetus), the human
creation of political life was a cause of celebrating human virtues
and practical abilities; whereas for Thrasymachus (an ambassador to
Athens from Chalcedon, a city in Asia Minor near modern Istanbul, who
is depicted in Plato’s Republic), it was a cause of
condemnation, the powerful in any city imposing laws to serve their
own advantage. In addition to the question of how laws fit into the
natural order, many sophists raised the question of whom the laws
benefited: were laws a socially and individually useful set of
restrictions on bad behavior, as some including Antiphon and an author
known today as the Anonymous Iamblichi seemed to think? Were
they the exploitative impositions of the strong on the week, as Plato
had his character Thrasymachus argue? Or were they the means by which
the many tamed and controlled the naturally powerful, preventing the
latter from using their strength for their own profit, as Plato had
his character Callicles argue? (See the entry on Callicles and
Thrasymachus.) These varied dimensions of the
nomos-phusis debate raised challenges for the
governing intellectual assumptions of the polis, even though
the sophists advertised themselves as teaching skills for success
within it, a number of them being employed as diplomats by cities
eager to exploit their rhetorical abilities. Socrates and Plato would
respond to this challenge in shaping a new genre of
“philosophy” which broke the mould of their predecessors
(on the genre of philosophy, see Nightingale 1993a). While it is
broadly true to say that Greek political thinkers generally
presupposed the importance of justice, in the fifth and fourth
centuries BCE many of them also increasingly problematized it.
2.3 Politics and Philosophy

In giving birth to philosophy, the polis also gave birth to a
tension between what Aristotle would describe as two lives: the life
of politics and the life of philosophy. A faultline between ethics and
politics, so closely connected in an ancient culture preoccupied with
flourishing (eudaimonia) and virtue (aretê),
opened here. Should philosophers act politically (and if so,
should they engage in ordinary politics in existing regimes, or work
to establish new ones), or should they abstain from politics in order
to live a life of pure contemplation? There was likewise a question as
to whether philosophers should think politically: were human
affairs worth thinking about in the broadest perspective opened by the
study of nature and of the gods? In engaging with questions of
rhetoric, virtue, knowledge, and justice, Socrates’
philosophical life was engaged with the political even before his
death (his trial and execution at the hands of the Athenian democratic
regime) embattled him with it. But for his student Plato and
Plato’s student Aristotle, the practice and even the study of
human affairs such as politics were less divine, and so less
admirable, than the broader study of truth about the natural and the
divine realms. Philosophy might have to address the political but its
highest calling soared above it. If Socrates’ political fate was
part of the stimulus for Plato to invent a new metaphysics and
epistemology in order to articulate an alternative realm of political
possibility, Plato’s dialogues show Socrates simultaneously
asserting an independence for those disciplines from the bonds of the
political
 alone.[5]

This distinctive Greek—and particularly Platonic – outlook
must condition any historical understanding of the development of
ancient political philosophy. While one influential approach to the
history of political thought takes its bearings from what a thinker
was trying to do in and by what he or she said or wrote, it is
important to recognize that the founders of ancient political
philosophy were in part trying to define a new space of doing as
philosophizing, independent of ordinary political action. This is not
to say that they did not also have ordinary political intentions, but
rather to stress that the invention of political philosophy was also
intended as a mode of reflection upon the value of ordinary political
life.
3. Socrates and Plato

According to Cicero, Socrates (469–399 BCE) was the first to
bring philosophy down from heaven, locating it in cities and even in
people’s kitchens (Tusc.V.10). A humbly born man who
refused the lucrative mantle of the sophistic professional teacher,
yet attracted many of the most ambitious and aristocratic youth of
Athens to accompany him in his questioning of them and their elders as
to the nature of the virtues they claimed to possess or understand, he
left no philosophical writings. We know him only through the surviving
testimony of others, first the lampoons in Aristophanes’ comic
plays, and above all the “Socratic” dialogues written by
his student Plato and his associate Xenophon (dialogues by others are
known only by titles or fragments), and the remarks of Plato’s
student Aristotle, as well as other sources from after or even long
after his death (for a collection, see Giannantoni 1990, and see the
entry on
 Socrates).
3.1 Socratic Ethics and Politics

Socrates seems to have been the first philosopher to treat
ethics—as opposed to cosmology and physics—as a distinct
area of inquiry. Asserting in Plato’s Apology (38a)
that “the unexamined life is not worth living,” he pressed
for definitions of the virtues or excellences which were widely
recognized and claimed by his fellows, but which they found difficult
to explain. As depicted by Plato, the search for such definitions led
invariably to a concern with knowledge of how best to live, as not
only one of the conventional virtues (in the form of wisdom) but also
as underpinning, even constituting, them all. That elevation of
knowledge in turn led Socrates to militate against the practices of
rhetoric and judgment which animated political institutions of Athens
such as the law-courts, Assembly and Council. Instead he posited the
existence, or at least the possibility, of political expertise,
claiming (in Plato’s Gorgias) to be the one person in
Athens who at least tried to pursue such a true politikê
technê, a complex notion that can be understood as meaning
politics as a kind of professional expertise (Grg. 521d). The
notion of political knowledge limited to one or a few experts, as
opposed to the embedded and networked knowledge produced and exercised
by the whole dêmos of Athens in their judgments and
political roles (Ober 2008), struck at the central premises of
Athenian democracy and those of Greek politics more generally (in
oligarchies, wealth rather than knowledge was the relevant criterion
for rule; in tyrannies, sheer power). Thus the nature of
Socrates’ concern with ethics led him directly into a form of
political philosophizing. The relation between politics and knowledge,
the meaning of justice as a virtue, the value of the military courage
which all Greek cities prized in their citizens, all seem to have been
central topics of Socratic conversation.
3.2 Socrates’ Trial: The Political Philosophy of Citizenship

That engagement with political philosophy was dramatically intensified
when Socrates was, at the age of seventy, arraigned, tried, and
sentenced to death by an Athenian popular jury. In a prosecution
brought by a group of his fellow citizens who claimed to be
shouldering that burden for the sake of the city (the usual way in
which prosecutions were brought in Athens), the charges laid were
against him were three-fold: not acknowledging the city’s gods;
introducing new gods; and corrupting the young (Apol. 24b).
Each of these had a political dimension, given the civic control of
central religious cults mentioned earlier, and the broad political
importance of educating the young to take their place in the civic
order. Timed a few years after the overthrow of a short-lived
oligarchic regime (known as that of “The Thirty”) which
had been led by several of Socrates’ sometime associates Critias
and Charmides (their oligarchic regime having been imposed after the
ignominious Athenian defeat in the war with Sparta which had earlier
seen another associate of Socrates (Alcibiades) turn traitor to
Athens), the trial must be suspected of having served as a substitute
for the prohibited political trials of the oligarchic partisans (such
trials having been generally barred by an amnesty passed in 403 BCE by
the restored democracy; see Cartledge 2009, Ch.7, Carawan 2013, Shear
2011).

Socrates’ speeches in the court trial—literary versions of
which were produced by Plato, Xenophon, and a number of other
followers—forced him to confront directly the question of his
role in an Athens defined by its democratic institutions and norms.
Socrates had played his part as an ordinary citizen, allowing his name
to go forward for selection by lot to serve on the Council, and
serving in the army when required. But he had not engaged actively in
“public affairs” (ta pragmata, Apol.
32e): he had not spoken in the Assembly (31c), nor, so far as we know,
brought any prosecutions in the law-courts. In Plato’s account,
after countering the religious accusations, Socrates acknowledged this
abstention from public affairs but claimed to have had a more
significant mission laid on him by the god Apollo when his oracle at
Delphi declared that no man was wiser than Socrates: his mission was
to stir up the city like a gadfly (30e), discussing virtue and related
matters (38a), and benefiting each person by “trying to persuade
him” to care for virtue rather than wealth for himself and for
the city (36c–d). He went so far as to claim that as a civic
benefactor, he deserved not death but the lifelong publicly provided
meals commonly awarded to an Olympic champion (36e–37a).
Socrates here depicts himself as a new kind of citizen,
conceptualizing the public good in a new way and so serving it best
through unprecedented actions, in contrast to the conventionally
defined paths of political contest and success (Villa 2001).

While depicting himself in his defense speeches in Plato’s
Apology as a new kind of virtuous citizen, Socrates makes
three remarks which have in modern times been seized upon as
indications of the principled limits which he might have put on the
requirement to obey the law. The first two recalled political
incidents: while serving on the Council, he had voted against an
illegal proposal (32b–c); and under the brief oligarchical
domination of “The Thirty”, he had disobeyed an order of
the ruling body to arrest a democratic partisan for execution
(32c–d). The third is a hypothetical remark. If, he imagines,
the jurors were to say to him, “we acquit you, but only on
condition that you spend no more time on this investigation and do not
practice philosophy, and if you are caught doing so you will
die,” his reply would be: “I will obey the god rather than
you, and as long as I draw breath and am able, I shall not cease to
practice philosophy” (both quotations excerpted from longer
sentences, 29c–d). Particularly in twentieth-century Anglophone
scholarship, these remarks have engendered a view of Socrates as
endorsing civil disobedience in certain circumstances, and so have
framed the question of civil disobedience and the grounds for
political obligation as arising in Plato. A significant debate on
these matters took shape in the United States in the 1960s and 1970s
at the time of widespread civil disobedience relating to civil rights
and the Vietnam War: see for example Konvitz 1964, Woozley 1972.

That debate has had to confront the fact that Socrates did not
actually disobey his own death sentence with which his trial
concluded: when the time came, he drank the poisonous hemlock as
prescribed by the jury. Before that moment, Plato imagines Socrates
being visited in prison by his friend Crito (in a dialogue which bears
the latter’s name), and urged to escape for the sake of his
friends and family, a practice which was frequently tolerated in
Athens so long as the escapee fled into exile. Socrates is not
persuaded by Crito’s arguments. He begins his examination of
them by recalling principles to which he and Crito had in the past
agreed, including the principle that it is better to suffer injustice
than to commit it (Cri. 47a–50a). He then goes on to
ventriloquize a series of speeches against escape, which he ascribes
to the “Laws of
 Athens”.[6]
 These speeches articulate a set of special connections between
Socrates and the Laws of Athens which, depending on one’s
reading, either flesh out the principle that it is better to suffer
injustice than to do it (by dramatizing reasons for which it would
unjust for Socrates to escape), or else stand in tension with it by
invoking absolutist grounds with implications more extensive than such
a principle would authorize (Harte 1999). On any reading, it is
important to bear in mind that Socrates is choosing to obey a jury
verdict that has commanded him to suffer what is arguably an
injustice, but not to commit one, so that one of his fundamental
ethical principles here as elsewhere in Plato (that it is better to
suffer an injustice than to commit one) is at least compatible with
his acceptance of the jury’s sentence.

The “Laws of Athens” appeal to a kind of social contract
made between themselves and Socrates. The contract is unequal: the
“Laws” compare themselves to parents and slaveowners, and
Socrates to child and slave. Obedience to them is owed, they claim,
because the “Laws” have provided the whole basis for
Socrates’ education and life in the city, a city in which he has
notably chosen to remain, never traveling abroad except on military
service. But the “Laws” also speak of the opportunity they
afford to Socrates to “persuade or obey” them (51b;
51e–52a). The meaning of this clause and its relevance to civil
disobedience is again much debated (Kraut 1984 remains a landmark).
Nevertheless, the image of Socrates tried, convicted, and made to die
(by his own hand) at the city’s command has come to be a vivid
and powerful symbol of tension in the relationship between political
philosophy and political authority.
3.3 The Defense of Justice in the Republic

The Crito depends upon a notion of justice and injustice
which it never defines. In the Republic, by contrast, a
dialogue in which Socrates is also the main character (and
first-person narrator) but in which the views he advances go beyond
the tight-knit pattern of debates in the dialogues discussed in
section 3.1, Plato (424/3–348/7
 BCE)[7]
 offers an account of justice linking the political to the
psychological and justice to a higher understanding of true goodness.
(See the entry on
 Plato.)
 The Republic is, with the Laws, an order of
magnitude longer than any other Platonic dialogue. Readers today are
likely to think of the Republic as the home par excellence of
political philosophy. But that view has also been challenged by
scholars who see it as primarily an ethical dialogue, driven by the
question of why the individual should be just (Annas 1999). This
section argues that the ethical and political concerns, and purposes,
of the dialogue are inextricably intertwined.

Near the beginning of the dialogue, a challenge is launched by the
character Thrasymachus, mentioned above, asserting that all actual
cities define justice so as to serve the advantage of the rulers. He
takes this to mean that the laws which their subjects are bound to
obey and the associated ethical virtue of justice which they are
enjoined to cultivate (traditionally seen as the necessary bond among
citizens and the justification for political rule), in fact amount to
a distorted sham. (See the entry on
 Callicles and Thrasymachus.)
 The question which Thrasymachus poses and which Plato’s
brothers Glaucon and Adeimantus reformulate—why should the
individual be just if he or she can get away with not being just, when
elevated above the demands of ordinary justice either by special power
or good fortune?—thus already has a political valence from the
outset.

Socrates then launches a speculation as to the origins of cities: the
city is held to have an existence independently of ethical concerns,
coming into being for economic reasons and immediately needing to
defend itself in war (and also to be able to make offensive war for
economic gain). However, this origin already gives rise to a
proto-ethical dimension, first insofar as the members of the primitive
city each do their own work (the structure of what will emerge as the
virtue of justice), which is fleshed out when political rulers are
established who are able to use their wisdom to help their subjects
maintain a psychological balance in their souls that approximates, if
it does not fully embody, the virtues of moderation and justice and so
enables them to enjoy a unified rather than a divided soul. The
question of why the individual should be just, figured at the outset
by the contrast with the putatively happy tyrant, is resolved
eventually by demonstrating that the tyrant will necessarily, in
virtue of the disorder of his soul, be at once maximally unjust and
maximally unhappy.

That resolution rests on the division of the soul into three parts by
which the Republic places moral psychology at the heart of
political philosophy. Both soul and city are posited by Socrates in
arguments in Books II–IV and VIII–IX, in particular, to
have a tripartite structure when the soul is embodied in a living
person. In the soul and city respectively, the rational part or class
should rule; the spirited part or class should act to support the rule
of that rational part; and the appetitive part of the soul and
producing class in the city should accept being governed by it. Both
soul and city are therefore in need of, and capable of exhibiting,
four virtues (427e–444a). Two of these pertain to individual
parts: the rational part being capable of wisdom, the spirited part of
courage. Two however are defined by relations between the parts:
moderation as the agreement of all three parts that reason should
rule, justice as each part doing its own (this echoes, in a radically
new context, a conservative Athenian suspicion of excessive democratic
polupragmosunê or busybody interference).

The result is that justice is defined as primarily a condition of
one’s soul or city as a whole, not as any specific just action;
yet if the soul or city is so ordered, the individual will have no
cause to engage in the paradigmatically unjust action of
pleonexia or grasping for more than one’s fair share. A
just soul will indeed reliably issue in traditionally just actions,
such as refraining from theft, murder, and sacrilege (contra Sachs
1963, who argues that Plato has simply abandoned the usual domain of
justice). But what makes its ‘justice’ count as such goes
beyond these particular actions and omissions, lying in the health and
orderliness of such a soul contrasted with the chaotic or even
tyrannical character of an unjust soul (Burnyeat 2013). To be a truly
effective, because wholly unified, agent, one must be just, moderate,
courageous and wise. The just person enjoys psychic health, which is
advantageous no matter how he is treated (fairly or unfairly) by gods
and men; correspondingly, the just society enjoys civic unity, which
is advantageous in being the fundamental way to avoid the assumed
supreme evil of civil war. In contrast, all other cities are
characterized as riven by civil war between the rich and the poor;
none of them counts as a single, unified city at all (see Rep.
422e–423a, and more generally, Book VIII of that dialogue).

By treating these ethical and political questions as interrelated, and
then going on to depict both an ideal political regime (“a
kallipolis”, the fine or beautiful city) in which they could be
solved, and the imperfect regimes into which such an ideal regime will
decay, the Republic lays out a novel and ambitious template
for political philosophy: not only to interrogate the meaning of
virtue and citizenship, but also to develop an ideal regime and an
account of how and why such regimes may fail. That template will be
followed by Aristotle’s Politics, by Cicero’s
De re publica, and by Thomas More’s Utopia,
among other successors. In Plato’s hands, however, this template
included some specific political prescriptions to maintain the unity
of the ideal city which most of his successors abhorred. In
particular, Book V of the Republic suggests that a
sufficiently unified regime can be achieved only by depriving its
guardian-rulers of private property and of private families, instead
making them live in austere communal conditions in which they are
financially supported by their money-making subjects and allowed to
procreate only when and with whom will best serve the city. In Book II
of his Politics, Aristotle would read this prescription as
applying to all the citizens in the city envisaged in the
Republic, and both he and, later on, Cicero would deplore
what they construed as this abolition of private property. Even those
following and radicalizing Plato precisely by advocating the abolition
of property for all the citizens, rather than only deprivation of it
for the rulers, as would the sixteenth-century Sir Thomas More, were
generally opposed to if not also scandalized by the suggestion of
procreative communism.

The Republic initiates a further tradition in political
philosophy by laying out a template for the integration of ethics and
political philosophy into a comprehensive account of epistemology and
metaphysics. By making the claim of the philosophers to rule depend on
their knowledge of the good and of the other Platonic Forms (in
conjunction with their moral character and tested practical
experience), the dialogue vindicates the Socratic and Platonic thought
that ruling well—what we might call “rule” proper
– requires a rare form of expertise rather than lay judgment,
rhetorical advice, or common knowledge. In the Republic, the
knowledge required for rule is not specialized, but comprehensive: the
knowledge of the good and the Forms is somehow to translate into an
ability to make laws as well as the everyday decisions of rule. The
rulers are philosophers who take turns over their lifetime in
exercising political authority. They define their vocation as that of
philosophizing, engaging in rule out of some sort of compulsion or
necessity (see the entry on
 Plato’s ethics and politics in the Republic).
 To that extent the Republic presents a paradox: if it is
widely considered the first major work of political
 philosophy,[8]
 it envisages a constitution in which philosophers rule but do so
separately from their role of philosophizing. 
3.4 The Definition of Political Knowledge in the Statesman

In the Statesman, Plato turns his attention to precisely the
topics identified at the end of the last section above. In a
discussion led by an unnamed person, a philosopher visiting Athens
from Elea, political expertise (harking back to the politikê
technê met above with Socrates, sect. 3.1) is identified by
separating it progressively by a set of distinctions from other forms
of expertise. The discussion is interrupted but ultimately enriched by
a story or myth in which politics is shown to be a matter of humans
ruling other humans in place of living under divine guidance
(O’Meara 2020). That human expertise of statecraft is ultimately
distinguished by its knowledge of the correct timing (kairos)
as to when its closest rivals should be exercised: these are three
forms of expertise that in fact corresponded to key political roles,
some of them formal offices, in Greek cities at the time, namely,
rhetoric, generalship, and judging (Lane 1998, Lane 2013c). The
statesman is wholly defined by the possession of that knowledge of
when it is best to exercise these and the other subordinate forms of
expertise, and by the role of exercising that knowledge in binding or
weaving the different groups of citizens together, a knowledge which
depends on a broader philosophical grasp but which is peculiarly
political (El Murr 2014). Here, political philosophy operates not just
to assimilate politics to a broader metaphysical horizon but also to
identify its specificity.

The Statesman also raises an important question about the
nature and value of rule by law, as opposed to rule by such expert
knowledge as embodied in a rare and likely singular individual. For
its part, the Republic had taken law in its stride as the
standard formulation to be utilized in the construction of the city in
speech by the dialogue’s principal interlocutors from Book II
onward, who constitute themselves as the ideal constitution’s
‘founders’ (Annas 2017, Lane 2013a). By contrast, the
Statesman analyzes law as in principle a stubborn and
imperfect substitute for the flexible deployment of expertise
(293e–303c). However, the principal interlocutors of the latter
dialogue go on to agree that if the choice is between an ignorant
imitator of the true political expert who changes the laws on the
basis of whim, and a law-bound polity, the latter would be preferable,
so bringing law back into the picture as an alternative to the ideal
after all.
3.5 The “Second-Best” Regime of the Laws

The Laws, a work reported to have been still on wax tablets,
and so possibly left unfinished when Plato died (Diogenes Laertius
III. 37), treats the specificity of politics as a matter not of
distinct vocational expertise but of the requirements of a
“second-best” (739a) city, one in which private property
is allowed, as opposed to an ideal or implicitly first-best regime in
which private property would be prohibited to all (thus going beyond
even the ideal regime of the Republic). In this section, as
in most scholarly discussions, I will assume that the second-best city
for which laws are laid out in the later books is the projected Cretan
colony of Magnesia, of which the Cretan (Cleinias) among the
dialogue’s three interlocutors has announced himself to be one
of the intended founders. (For an alternative argument, that the
second-best city is not meant to be Magnesia, see Bartels 2017.) In
this second-best city, the legislation for which is sketched out in
speech by the three interlocutors of the dialogue, politics still aims
at virtue, and at the virtue of all the citizens, but those citizens
all play a part in holding civic offices; the ordinary activities of
politics are shared, in what is described as a mixture of monarchy and
democracy. That description gives rise to an idea of the “mixed
regime” or “mixed constitution” which later became
influential in its own right, as we shall see below (section 6).

Another influential aspect of the Laws is its positive
evaluation of the nature of law itself as a topic proper to political
philosophy. While the Laws shares with the Statesman
the notion of law in an isolated and singular sense as being brutish
and stubborn compared to expert knowledge, it recommends a
“double” notion of law, in which each such command is
prefaced with a persuasive account of its rationale, addressed to the
citizens, who are expected to read and understand it (719b–723d,
and passim). Some scholars have found that to be a
distinctively democratic and liberal account of law (Bobonich 2002;
see also the entry on
 Plato on utopia).
 That arguably goes too far in a proceduralist direction, given that
the value of law remains its embodiment of reason or understanding
(nous), so that while adding persuasive preludes is a better
way to exercise the coercive force of law, no agreement on the basis
of persuasion could justify laws which departed from the standard of
nous (Laks 2005). Nevertheless, the emphasis on law as an
embodiment of reason, and as articulating the political ideals of the
city in a form that its citizens are to study and internalize
(Nightingale 1993b, 1999), is distinctive to this dialogue.

Also notable is that the Laws’ emphasis on all citizens
as eligible, and so presumptively capable, to hold offices, differs
significantly from the rule reserved for philosophers in the
 Republic.[9]
 The outlook in the Laws may have somewhat more affinity with
the closing passages of the Statesman, which refer to the
offices or quasi-offices of rhetor, general and judge which at least
certain citizens will hold, those with the relevant expertise to play
each role. The Statesman however reserves a special
extraordinary role (presented as falling outside the structure of
ordinary civic offices) for the statesman whenever he is present in
the city (Lane 2013b). The role of the Statesman’s
eponymous figure must therefore be distinguished from that of the
“Nocturnal Council” in the Laws (which is
actually to meet just before dawn), a body of citizens who are
selected for wisdom and judiciousness and whose role is to review the
laws and suggest potential changes to a body empowered to change them,
rather than (as in the Statesman, at least theoretically) to
override them when it is better to do so (Reid 2021).

Much literature on Plato’s political philosophy has debated
whether the turn in the Laws to the “second-best”
reflects a new form of realism on Plato’s part about politics
more generally, invoking other remarks by the Visitor from Athens, one
of the three interlocutors, along with Cleinias and the Spartan
Megillus, which suggest that no one could ever be uniformly and
reliably virtuous and immune to corruption, though this is not
unequivocally stated (e.g. 874e–875d). Has Plato in the
Laws given up on his earlier idealism which rested on the
possibility of the philosopher-king, or on the idea of the perfectly
knowledgeable statesman? If so, should that be interpreted as
disillusionment or pessimism on his part, or as a more democratic or
liberal turn? Or are there more fundamental continuities that connect
and underlie even these seeming shifts? These questions structure the
broad debate about the meaning and trajectory of Platonic political
philosophy (for an overview, compare Klosko 2006 to Schofield
2006).
4. Aristotle

The two Platonic themes of superior political knowledge and, expressed
particularly in his Laws, political participation, also
structure the political thought of Aristotle (384–322 BCE), who
studied in Plato’s Academy as a youth and researched there for
many years thereafter. Living much of his life as a resident alien in
Athens, with close familial ties to the extra-polis
Macedonian court which would, near the end of his life, bring Athens
under its sway, Aristotle at once thematized the fundamental
perspective of the Greek citizenship of equals and at the same time
acknowledged the claim to rule of anyone of truly superior political
knowledge. While building on Plato’s project of demarcating
political expertise and depicting ideal as well as imperfect cities,
the advances and new directions that Aristotle pioneered in political
philosophy reflect certain disagreements with Plato in their wider
philosophies, though also with some deep commonalities.
4.1 Aristotle’s Philosophical Method and Ethics

Whereas Plato’s philosophy continually sought a single or small
set of unifying truths behind the veil of appearance,
Aristotle’s wide-ranging researches into what would now be
considered the natural sciences, as well as in logic and other areas
of inquiry, manifested respect for the opinions of “the many and
the wise” as a starting-point for philosophical understanding.
His approach likewise manifested appreciation of the multiplicity of
forms of knowledge, in particular the cleavage between theoretical
understanding of the world as it necessarily is, and practical
knowledge of how to deliberate about acting in relation to whatever
“could be otherwise.” Uniting his accounts of phenomena as
different as plants, animals, ethics and politics, was a teleological
structure of explanation. Biological creatures work to fulfill the
realization of their end or telos, a specific way of living a
complete life characteristic of the plants or animals of their own
kind, which is the distinctive purpose that defines their fundamental
nature—just as human artifacts are designed and used for
specific ends. While every human being, in acting, posits a particular
telos as the purpose making that action intelligible, this
should ideally reflect the overall natural telos of humans as
such.

Here, however, arises a problem unique to humans. Whereas other
animals have a single telos defining their nature (living the
full life of a frog, including reproduction, being the sole
telos of each frog, in the example used by Lear 1998), humans
both have a distinctive human nature—arising from the unique
capacity to use language to deliberate about how to act—and
also share in the divine nature in their ability to use reason to
understand the eternal and intelligible order of the world. Practical
reason is the domain of ethics and politics, the uniquely human
domain. Yet the political life is not necessarily the best life,
compared with that devoted to the divinely shared human capacity for
theoretical reason and philosophical thinking (compare Nicomachean
Ethics I with X.7–9). Whether it is the life of
contemplative reason or the life of practical reason that is best for
humans, the good life will require the development of the various
human moral and intellectual virtues, which include (without being
limited to) courage, moderation, justice, prudence, understanding, and
wisdom. 
4.2 Ethics and Politics by Way of Law

In considering practical reason to be the domain of both ethics and
politics, Aristotle follows Plato in drawing no sharp line between
those two domains (see on this point for ancient testimonies and
modern arguments respectively, Bodéüs 1993: 22–24
and 59–63, and Vander Waerdt 1991, though for a contrary
argument, see Duvall and Dotson 1998). In fact he closes his
Nicomachean Ethics by remarking that for most people, the
practice of ethics can only be ensured by their being governed by law,
which combines necessity (compulsion) with reason and habituates
people toward virtuous action (Nicomachean Ethics
1179b32–1180a5) (Duke 2020). Because, for most people, the ethical
life presupposes government by law, the student of ethics must become
a student of political science, studying the science of legislation in
light of the collection of constitutions assembled by Aristotle and
his school in the Lyceum. All but part of one of the over one hundred
items in this collection reported in antiquity have been lost: a
considerable part of the analysis of the “Constitution of
Athens” was recovered from a papyrus discovered in the
nineteenth century. Aristotle’s theoretical claims about the
nature of politics in the Politics must be understood against
this backdrop. The legislator (whose standpoint is adopted in the
Politics, see the entry on
 Aristotle’s political theory)
 needs to have a grasp of the nature of politics as such (pursued
especially in Books I and III); an understanding of the major
faultlines in the interpretation and practice of politics (pursued
especially in Books II and IV–VI); and a grip on the structure
and characteristics of the specific city for which he aims to
legislate (pursued also in Book II for existing constitutions and
constitutional models; Books IV–VI for types of flawed
constitutions; and Books VII–VIII for the “best
constitution” (1323a14).

At the beginning of Book IV (1288b1–39), Aristotle offers a
fourfold account of what the expertise regarding constitutions must
encompass. As glossed by Eugene Garver (2011: 107), and drawing on
standard Aristotelian terminology distinguishing formal from material
causes, these include: “The first, ‘that which is best in
the abstract’...orients politics around the end of politics, the
best life. The second, the best relative to circumstances, starts with
the material cause and organizes political inquiry around the best
that can be made out of given material. The third, the best on a
hypothesis, starts not from the true end of politics, but any posited
end, and so looks for means and devices that will preserve any given
constitution. The final inquiry, the search for ‘the form of
constitution which is best suited to states in general,’
articulates a formal cause that can organize almost any material, any
kind of people.” These four elements of expertise regarding
constitution are not tidily segregated in different parts of the text;
they are pursued variously, sometimes in combination, and draw on
wider discussions of the nature of politics and the human good that
are threaded throughout.
4.3 Claims to Rule

The Politics begins by setting the stage for the first kind
of understanding of constitutions identified above, by offering an
analysis of the teleological ends of life and the human capacity for
speech which together support its two most famous contentions: that
“it is evident that the state is a creation of nature, and that
man is by nature a political animal” (I.2, 1253a2–3). (Hu
2020 discusses the naturalness of the polis.) While for some
modern readers this sentence asserts that political participation is
necessary for virtuous human flourishing (as for Irwin 1990), others
contend that “the argument that man is a political animal does
not imply that man must participate in politics to become virtuous,
only that he must literally be a part of a polis and live
under its laws.” (Mulgan 1990:
 205)[10]
 In either case, as Hannah Arendt (1958) emphasizes, Aristotle’s
understanding of civic unity insists on respect for human plurality as
the condition of political action; in Book II, he criticizes
Plato’s kallipolis (the beautiful city for which a
constitution is sketched in the Republic) for interpreting
the requirement of civic unity in so extreme a fashion as to have
obliterated the properly political domain altogether (Nussbaum 1980).
Nevertheless, civic unity is still an aim of Aristotle’s ideal
virtuous regime, and a limited Platonic spirit survives in the common
meals that this regime would offer to all citizens: VII.10. 

If “man is by nature a political animal,” how can it be
just to exclude some human beings from a full share, and in some cases
from any share, in political life? Aristotle recognizes that this
question must be confronted, and he acknowledges some unnamed thinkers
who had answered that it is indeed unjust. For these unnamed figures,
slavery is not merely a conventional arrangement (rather than a
natural one); it is a conventional arrangement which is contrary to
what is natural, and this is why it should be counted as unjust. As
Aristotle describes their view: “Others affirm that the rule of
a master over slaves is contrary to nature [literally: ‘against
nature’ (para phusin)], and that the distinction
between slave and freeman exists by convention [nomō,
dative] only, and not by nature [phusei]; and being an
interference with nature is therefore unjust [not dikaion]:
for it is force [biaion]” (I.4,
1253b20–23). Aristotle blocks the inference that any
relationship of slavery is contrary to nature and therefore unjust, by
arguing that there are or could be grounds for a kind of slavery that
is indeed consonant with nature: namely, he claims, enslavement of
those whose practical reason is incapable of fully ruling their own
actions. He contends that the person who is by nature a slave
“has no deliberative faculty at all; the woman has, but it is
without authority, and the child has, but it is immature” (I.13,
1260a12–14) (on interpretation of this passage in light of
Aristotle’s biological works, Karbowski 2012; for an argument
that Aristotelian natures are made through habituation, Frank 2005).
This does not imply that any or all actually enslaved persons are
natural slaves, though Aristotle in the same chapter and elsewhere
remarks on “barbarians,” especially peoples who live in
certain climates, as fitted for slavery (Kraut 2002:
290–95). Some of the pernicious afterlives of this view and of
the Aristotelian account of natural slavery more generally in later
defenses of slavery are recounted in Huxley 1980 and Monoson 2011. On
many interpretations, the view also leads to some tension in
specifying the function of slavery as an institution, since that
institution presupposes that the slave can understand and follow the
master’s commands, which would seem to require some degree of
deliberative capacity even on Aristotle’s own terms. The
exclusion of some human beings from a share in political life and
their subjection to the domination and exploitation of a relationship
of enslavement shadows Aristotle’s exploration of the value of
the life of politics for realizing human nature.

Elsewhere in the Politics, the Greek dictum of citizenship
among equals—that “a citizen is one who shares in
governing and being governed” (III.13, 1283b42–1284a1,
also translatable as “ruling and being ruled in
turn”)—is presented as an analytical truth, leaving open
how such equality is to be conceived in practice (and again,
consistent in the logic of the argument with the potential exclusion
of some from the domain of equality altogether). The citizen
“shares in the administration of justice, and in offices”
(III.1, 1275a23–24). In defective regimes, the good citizen and
the good man may come apart.  The good citizen of a defective regime
is one whose character suits the particular regime in question
(whether oligarchic, or democratic, say) and equips him to support it
loyally; hence he may be deformed or stunted by a role of holding (or
a role of holding accountable) offices defined on incorrect terms. In
“the best state,” however, the citizen is “one who
is able and chooses to be governed and to govern with a view to the
life of excellence” (III.13, 1284a1–3). In such a state,
“the citizens must not lead the life of artisans or tradesmen,
for such a life is ignoble and inimical to excellence” (VII.9,
1328b39–41), nor that of farmers, as political participation
requires leisure. Here the limitations and exclusions among actual
humans licensed by the principled formulation of the
possibility—requiring actual realization—of human virtue
become apparent.

Aristotle recognizes that there are other possible claims, or as it
were titles, to political rule: “There is also a doubt as to
what is to be the supreme power in the state:—Is it the
multitude? Or the wealthy? Or the good? Or the one best man? Or a
tyrant?” (III.10, 1281a11–13). He develops in particular
detail the arguments that might be made on behalf of the many and the
knowledgeable one respectively. The many can judge, as they did in
Athenian dramatic audiences, juries, and the Assembly (where they
“judged”, by voting on, the merits of something advanced
for their consideration, whether a play, an indictment, or a
speaker’s proposed resolution). Aristotle uses the image of a
collectively provided feast to illustrate the potential superiority of
such collective judgement; how to interpret this image (whether as a
potluck, Waldron 1995, Wilson 2011, Ober 2013, or in a more
aggregative way, Bouchard 2011, Cammack 2013, Lane 2013a, Hatzistavrou
2021) and other images that he uses is a matter of some renewed
controversy (for a review, see Bobonich 2015). But the lesson
Aristotle draws from the various images is clearly limited to
vindicating a role of the many in electing and holding accountable
incumbents of the highest offices rather than in holding such offices
themselves (III.11, 1281b31; Lane 2013a). The many can contribute to
virtuous decision-making in their collective capacity of
judgment—presumably in assemblies and juries—but not as
individual high officials (Lane 2013a, 2014b, Poddighe 2014).

In the contrasting case of the one supremely excellent person,
Aristotle argues that such a person has, strictly speaking, no equals,
and so cannot be made justly to take a turn in rule, holding office
for a time, as one citizen among others. Instead it is right that such
a person should rule without the term limits that political office
would ordinarily require:

If, however, there be some one person, or more than one, although not
enough to make up the full complement of a state, whose excellence is
so pre-eminent that the excellence or the political capacity of all
the rest admit of no comparison with his or theirs, he or they can be
no longer regarded as part of a state; for justice will not be done to
the superior, if he is reckoned only as the equal of those who are so
far inferior to him in excellence and in political capacity. Such a
man may truly be deemed a god among men ….men like him should
be kings in their state for life. (III.13,
1284a3–11…1284b32–34; cf. III.17, 1288a24–29)


On one reading, this implies that virtuous monarchy does indeed count
as a political regime, albeit one in which only one or a few of the
citizens are eligible to hold the highest offices (Riesbeck 2014). Yet
this argument is left at the hypothetical level. In the absence of
such a superlatively virtuous, even godlike individual, the
formulation of political rule as involving some kind of turn-taking by
a large body of sufficiently virtuous citizens remains preeminent
(though even this should not be read to imply that all should in fact
alternate in office, or even that all should necessarily be eligible
for all offices).

As Aristotle turn to consideration of the best constitutions relative
to particular (and imperfect) circumstances, the major issue is
conflict between rival factions over the basis for defining equality
and so justice. In the Nicomachean Ethics, Book V, Aristotle
had identified two types of equality: geometrical, or proportional to
merit; and arithmetical, or proportional to mere numerical counting.
In Politics III.9 he picks up this distinction and aligns it
with the conflict between oligarchical and democratic justice. As he
later puts it, “Democrats say that justice is that to which the
majority agree, oligarchs that to which the wealthier class
agree…” (VI.3, 1318a18–20), while truly
aristocratic justice would enfranchise only those equal in virtue.
This attention to the actual political contentions of rival Greek
groups leads into a discussion of the relative goodness and badness of
imperfect regimes, modeled in part on Plato’s
Statesman. Whereas that Platonic text had distinguished
monarchy from tyranny, aristocracy from oligarchy, and good from bad
democracy on the basis of obedience to law (all these regimes being
conceived as lacking the genuine political knowledge of the true
statesman), Aristotle instead makes the dividing line the question of
ruling for the common advantage as opposed to ruling for the advantage
of a single faction. The “bad” democracy, for example,
rules for the faction of the many as opposed to the faction of the
few, whereas the “good” democracy—which Aristotle
baptizes “polity”, using the general word for
“constitution” (politeia)—rules for the
advantage of all citizens. Aristotle augments this analysis with
appeals to historical narrative, overlapping with the narrative of
Athenian political history offered in the Constitution of
Athens compiled by him or, more likely, by members of his school.
On his telling in the Politics, Athenian democracy had
degenerated from an aboriginal democracy of non-meddling farmers
(VI.4), through various intermediate forms, to a democracy (seemingly
that of contemporary fourth-century Athens) in which men rule, not
laws. Yet this trajectory does not prevent him from asserting that in
general democracy is “most tolerable” of the three
perversions (IV.2, 1289b4–5) and noting that it at least
involves the characteristic political liberty of ruling and being
ruled in turn (VI.2).

A further major turn in the analysis comes when the question of some
single “best” regime is replaced by a question about not
what is “best” in the “ideal” sense, but the
good constitution “that is easily attainable by all”
(IV.1, 1288a37–39) and in practice best for most cities (IV.11).
This Aristotle calls the middling regime: a political, because
sociological, mean between oligarchy and democracy, in which the
middle classes hold the preponderance of both wealth distribution and
political power. Thus it is attainable through reform of either an
oligarchy or a democracy, the most prevalent constitutions among the
Greeks. Strikingly, his example of such a regime is Sparta: presented
as a case of a characteristically democratic distribution of education
(among citizens only, of course) coupled with the characteristically
aristocratic principle of election to offices rather than selection by
lot (IV.9) (though to be sure, democracies such as Athens made use of
election for certain of the highest offices as well).
4.4 Aristotle in Political Philosophy

“All modern discussions of citizenship as a noninstrumental
good-in-itself are indebted, if only indirectly, to him [sc.
Aristotle]” (Ober 1998: 290). The Politics emphasizes
that “a state is not a mere society, having a common place,
established for the prevention of mutual crime and for the sake of
exchange” but is rather “a community of families and
aggregations of families [sc. united] in well-being, for the sake of a
perfect and self-sufficing life” (III.9, 1280b30–34, with
square brackets added). It has been suggested in this article that the
final clause of that sentence is important: Aristotelian citizenship
counts as a noninstrumental good-in-itself only so long as it does
indeed aim at the telos of a perfect life. That is, while
Aristotle indeed valued the possibility of political participation in
officeholding and the control of officeholding as part of the best
constitution, he saw its value as most fully realized only insofar as
it was an expression of virtue, as it would be in that best
constitution (whether governed by a collectivity of virtuous citizens
as in the regime described in Books VII and VIII, or in the rare and
perhaps purely hypothetical case of a superlatively virtuous
monarch).

Nevertheless, Ober’s observation rings true more broadly for the
historical significance of Aristotle’s political thought. The
medieval rediscovery in the West of the full Greek texts of
Aristotle’s Ethics and Politics and their
translation into Latin in the thirteenth century served as a basis for
reconceiving civic life as valuable on the basis of reason independent
of revelation. Thus 1260 – the date of William of
Moerbeke’s complete Latin translation of the
Politics—symbolizes a fundamental turning point in
political philosophy, one in which Aristotelian philosophy would be
widely deployed within certain strands of thought of the Catholic
Church, while also inspiring a wide range of philosophical movements
and later becoming the target of others. Indeed, modern debates over
the meaning of Aristotle find him a precursor of or inspiration for a
range of intellectual and political positions: Aristotle as a
communitarian (MacIntyre 1984) vs. Aristotle as an exponent of class
conflict (Yack 1993); Aristotle as a democrat, or at least as
providing the basis for democracy (Frank 2005), vs. Aristotle in
opposition to Athenian democracy in his day (Ober 1998). One
interesting development has been the use of Aristotle to articulate an
ethics of capability (Nussbaum 1993). In evaluating Aristotle’s
political thought, it is important to distinguish between modern
democratic assumptions and his own starting points, many of which were
in tension with the democracies of his own time.
5. Hellenistic Philosophies and Politics

Important developments in political thinking and practice took place
under the Hellenistic kingdoms that supplanted Macedon in its
suzerainty over the formerly independent Greek city-states. These
included, for example, a genre of rhetorical letters addressed to
rulers, and the important analysis of Greek and Roman constitutional
change by the second-century Greek historian Polybius (Hahm 2000). As
kingships flourished among the Hellenistic kingdoms until they in turn
came under Roman rule, not only the value of political participation,
but also the proper domains of politics, were widely debated.
Different authors would orient themselves respectively to
still-surviving polis communities and the various leagues which united
many of them in the Hellenistic period; to the kingdoms mentioned
above; to the Roman constitution, and eventually to the special forms
of imperial power which eventually arose therein; and in more
philosophical terms, to the cosmos as a whole and all rational beings
within it.
5.1 Persisting and New Schools

In addition to the major movements of Epicureanism and Stoicism
treated separately below, other schools also persisted and arose in
this period. Those persisting included the Platonic Academy
(transformed in a skeptical direction) and the Aristotelian Lyceum
(the Peripatetic School). Newcomers, albeit tracing themselves to
their own understanding of the figure of Socrates, included the Cynics
and the Pyrrhonist skeptics, and we focus on these latter two
here.

The Cynics took their name from the Greek for “dog,”
referring to the animal-like life indifferent to social conventions
which they pursued, carrying out all their bodily functions in full
public view. While this generally led them to advocate what might be
considered more an anti-politics than a politics, a provocative
statement by their founder Diogenes of Sinope (c.404–323 BCE)
– answering a query about his birthplace by asserting himself to
be a “citizen of the world” (Diogenes Laertius, VI. 63)
– would resonate with later Stoics and others developing a
political philosophy that has become known as cosmopolitanism (see the
entry on
 cosmopolitanism).
 Diogenes’ indifference to political power was also reflected in
his reported reply to the visiting world-conqueror Alexander the
Great, asking him to request a boon: all the Cynic wanted was for the
emperor to step out of his light (Diogenes Laertius, VI. 38). In a
lineage stretching from Diogenes to his follower Crates, who became
the teacher of Zeno, the founder of Stoicism, we can see the
Cynic-Stoic kinship especially in the early Stoics’ rejection of
many conventional political and moral opinions. Yet the Cynics also
manifested some parallels with the Epicureans and even with the
skeptics.

One branch of ancient skepticism had its roots in Plato’s
Academy, which from the time of Arcesilaus’ headship in the
mid-260s BCE turned in a skeptical direction, arguing that there was
no clear criterion of truth and so philosophers can only suspend
judgment. While that was an “Academic” position within
philosophical debate, a possible forebear (Pyrrho) had in the fourth
century BCE putatively demonstrated the tranquility of mind which such
a position could bring, by living a life seemingly without any
investment in the truth of his beliefs (though the question of how,
and how far, Pyrrho was guided by appearances would perplex later
followers). (See the entry on
 Pyrrho.)
 From the first century BCE, a radical movement of
“Pyrrhonist” skepticism was developed outside the Academy
by Aenesidemus, followed about a century later by Agrippa, in a
movement summed up for posterity in the second-century CE work of
Sextus Empiricius (Outlines of Pyrrhonism) which would have a
considerable influence on early modern philosophy. Meanwhile the
milder “Academic” skepticism, allowing the inquirer to
incline to one side or another though not to invest in full belief,
had significant influence on first-century BCE figures such as Cicero.
(See the entry on
 ancient skepticism.)
5.2 Epicureanism

Founded by Epicurus in his “Garden” in Athens in the early
third century BCE, and elaborated by, among others, the remarkable
Latin poet Lucretius in the mid first century BCE, the various members
of the Epicurean school did not see politics as a straightforward part
of the good life or a fulfillment of the flourishing of human nature,
though their views of its origins, nature, and largely instrumental
value were complex (for an overview, see Robitzsch 2017). For his
part, Epicurus himself (see the entry on
 Epicurus)
 is reported in his “Key Doctrines” to have held a
contractarian view of justice for mutual protection from harm
(reminiscent of Glaucon’s initial proposal about justice in
Republic Book II, which itself seems to echo the
nomos-phusis debate among the 5th c. BCE sophists). Justice
serves utility (Alberti 1995): as Epicurus wrote, “If someone
makes a law and it does not happen to accord with the utility of
social relationships, it no longer has the nature of justice”
(KD 36, LS 22B) (on Epicurean justice, Aoiz and Boeri 2022).
The greatest utility is that of tranquility or security, which is the
naturally desired end or goal. While, as Annas 1993: 298 argues, the
individual Epicurean agent will be disposed to justice as part of the
path to tranquility properly understood (“The just <life>
is most free from disturbance…”, KD 36, LS 22B),
nevertheless laws will be necessary to enforce obedience to the
contract by most people, and indeed one should obey the laws in order
to attain peace of mind (KD 34–35, LS
22A4–5).

For Epicureans, the city serves a legitimate and necessary function in
ensuring security. But this does not mean that an active public life
is also normally the most rational path to security. On the contrary,
while many people will be attracted to the possible fortune and glory
of such a life, and while cities need such people, the Epicurean sage
will on the whole refrain from active political participation (for
discussion of texts, including some exceptions, both in Lucretius and
other evidence, see Fowler 2007). Instead the insecurities of life are
best met by the formation of a community of friends living together
and sharing their lives. Friendships both secure us against risks and
anxieties (more reliably than the hazards of a political career) and
also provide pleasures and indeed joy: to quote Epicurus once again,
“The man of noble character is chiefly concerned with wisdom and
friendship. Of these the former is a mortal good, but the latter is
immortal” (Vatican Sayings 78, LS 22F (7)).

A potential sticking point for Epicurean ethics and politics is the
justification for a still further dimension of communal life: the
willingness to sacrifice oneself for a friend, or to risk breaking the
law for the greater good of one’s fellow citizens (Sharples
1996: 122). It would seem difficult to construct a compelling
theoretical justification for such actions from Epicurean premises,
which privilege obedience to law in order to avoid civic strife (as
seen for example in key moments in Lucretius’ poem De Rerum
Natura, V.925–1157; see Campbell 2003, especially on lines
1011–1027), though Cicero has Torquatus report in De
Finibus (I.69) that at least some Epicureans believed that
friendly relationships could mature into love of a friend for their
own sake. Whatever the theoretical conundrum, it did not prevent a
number of Epicureans from undertaking such risky public service, among
them more than one of the assassins of Julius Caesar (Sedley 1997;
Fowler 1989 discusses a wide range of Roman Epicurean attitudes). A
more modest but still striking example of Epicurean public service is
the huge portico inscribed with Epicurean sayings and exegesis in
second-century Oenoanda (in modern-day Turkey) by one Diogenes of that
city (Smith 1992, 2003). Whether or not his fellow citizens
appreciated the instruction, modern archaeologists and philosophers
are grateful for this unparalleled source of knowledge of Epicurean
philosophy.
5.3 Stoicism

While Epicurus held that the sage would not engage in politics except
in “some special circumstance,” Zeno, the founder of the
Stoic school (see the entry on
 Stoicism),
 held rather that a true sage “will engage in politics unless
something prevents it” (Seneca, De Otio 3.2, as
translated and quoted in Sharples 1996: 124; SVF 1.271). As
we shall see, a Stoic commitment to politics generally took it to be
part of nature’s rational plan for human happiness, though this
was not incompatible with a Cynic tincture of questioning whether
existing laws are truly in accordance with the natural law (Vogt
2008). The question however of the nature of the polity in which
politics was to be exercised remains contested as a matter of the
interpretation of various Stoic figures, who across the lifetime of
the school encompassed both the early generation of the school’s
leaders (Zeno and his successor Chrysippus) and later figures thriving
in the Roman period who wrote variously in Greek and in Latin (for an
overview, see Laurand 2005). To be sure, the polity in question was
invariably figured as a city, according to the account given in Dio
Chrysostom (36.20: “ They [the Stoics] say that a city is a
group of people living in the same place and administered by
law” (SVF 3.329, as translated in LS 67J). But which
people? Whether the members of this city were to be all humans
together with the gods, or only human sages and the gods, and whether
the city is to be envisaged as a distinct foundation or as identical
with the cosmos, has much exercised both Stoic thinkers and subsequent
interpreters. And which law? How does or should the law of a
particular city relate to the natural law? These questions are
canvassed further as this section unfolds.

Both Zeno and Chrysippus wrote works in the Platonic genre entitled
Republic, neither of which survives in full. (So too,
reportedly, had Diogenes the Cynic.) Zeno’s was written as a
young man, allegedly under Cynic influence, rejecting the use of money
in the characteristic Cynic vein. His portrait of the republic
combines the Stoic idea of a natural law by which human conduct is
harmonized with cosmic order, with a classical vision of politics in
which a Platonic ideal of friendship through communist and sexual
bonding (more erotic than familial for Zeno) persists (following
Schofield 1991: 22–56). He seems to have adopted Plato’s
prescription for the community of women and children, and at least
some aspects of his insistence on the potential civic equality of men
and women and political irrelevance of their anatomical differences.
Humans share many characteristics and tendencies with other animals,
and their initial impulse to form into society is a social rather than
strictly political one: they are animated by a tendency to associate
with those akin to themselves (the Stoic notion of
oikeiôsis).

Such a social tendency is, according to what is reported of the
opening of Chrysippus’ lost treatise On Law,
transformed into a political relationship by means of law: “Law
is king of all things human and divine. Law must preside over what is
honourable and base, as ruler and as guide, and thus be the standard
of right and wrong, prescribing to animals whose nature is political
what they should do, and prohibiting them from what they should not
do” (SVF 3.314, as translated in LS 67R). Yet, in
keeping with some tendencies in Platonism and Cynicism, such law might
have to be radically different from existing laws if it is to be in
full conformity with nature and reason. For Chrysippus, even certain
forms of incest are said to have been “discredited without
reason” (SVF 3.753, as translated in LS 67F): a
comparison with animals would license them.

Plutarch’s characterization of Zeno’s Republic as
prescribing that “we should regard all men as our
fellow-citizens and local residents” (SVF 1.262, as
translated in LS 67A), composed around the end of the first century of
the Common Era, has often been read as prescribing a kind of
cosmopolitanism that builds on Diogenes’ paradoxical Cynic
version of that stance. However, the reliability of this text as an
account of Zeno has been questioned, and just how this fellowship of
all humans relates to the fellowship of rationally perfect sages and
to the sharing of humans and gods in the cosmos has been debated (for
a defense and interpretation of Plutarch’s claim as applying to
all humans, see Vogt 2008: 86–90, contra the views of Schofield
1991 and Vander Waerdt
 1991).[11]
 Arguably, as in the case of Aristotle, the underlying kinship by
nature establishes a potential for a full civic membership which is to
be based solely on virtue, itself potentially available to all
rational beings but realized in practice by few or perhaps even none.
This is one interpretation of the report that Zeno presented
“only virtuous people in the Republic as citizens,
friends, relations and free” (as translated in LS 67B; this is
preserved in Diogenes Laertius 7.32–7.33, found in SVF
1.226 and 1.222 respectively).

Especially for the early Stoics, existing cities remained an accepted
arena both for political action in practice—Stoic sages and
scholars advising kings and serving in offices (SVF 3.686;
translated in LS 67W)—insofar as the notion of a distinctive
individual city remained the principal framework for defining the
nature of politics in terms of justice. Yet the role of natural law
already in the early Stoics, and certainly in later ones, came to
support an alternative horizon for politics on the scale of the cosmos
as a whole (Laurand 2005). Malcolm Schofield (1991: 103) has argued
that this development “mediates the transition from
republicanism to natural law theory,” so bequeathing a crucial
resource to early modern thinkers who sought to construct new versions
of the latter. Meanwhile, in the years of the Roman republic, certain
affinities between Stoic and republican ideas proved significant, as
we shall now see.
5.4 Hellenistic Philosophies and Roman Republican Politics

Roman fascination with Greek philosophy was catalyzed by the Athenian
embassy of three leading philosophers sent to Rome to plead the legal
case of their city in 156/155
 BCE;[12]
 it continued as late as the early sixth century CE, as seen
especially in the life of the eminent philosophical polymath and Roman
senator under barbarian rule, Boethius. Roman aristocrats were
especially attracted to the Stoic willingness to countenance the
kingly and political lives alongside the scholarly one as equally
preferable (SVF 3.686, translated in LS 67W). They began to
study the Stoa seriously from the late second century BCE. The
affinity between Stoicism and Roman republicanism was enhanced by the
second-century Stoic teacher Panaetius, who seems to have argued that
the Roman mos maiorum or ancient ways and customs were the
best form of government, so burnishing philosophical principle with
the ancestral piety dear to the Romans. To be sure, in the later
throes of civil war, many Stoics would have difficulty in justifying
assassination of tyrants, insofar as civil war would be worse than
even a monarchy flouting the law, as one Roman adherent to the school
would say in rebuffing Junius Brutus’ attempt to recruit him to
the conspiracy to murder Caesar (Plut. Brut. 12. 3–4).
Other Romans were strongly attracted to Epicureanism or to Cynicism,
and some of these, however paradoxically, likewise played significant
roles in political life. Thus the distinctive lineaments of the Roman
republic, now to be described, were debated and interpreted by the
philosophically minded in terms of Greek political theory; conversely,
it has been argued that Hellenistic philosophies were significant in
shaping the ways in which Roman jurists conceived of law (Brouwer
2021).
6. The Roman Republic and Cicero

While the founders of the city of Rome were said to be the legendary
twins Romulus and Remus, Romans would come to identify the origins of
their distinctive liberty in the killing of a tyrannical king,
generally dated in 509 BCE, by the ancestor of the Junius Brutus who
would eventually kill Julius Caesar. The position of king was replaced
by two annually elected consuls, the royal council became the Senate,
and popular assemblies were established to elect magistrates and pass
the laws they proposed. By Cicero’s time, this
regime—self-identified as the S.P.Q.R., the “Senatus
populusque Romanus” or “Senate and people of
 Rome”[13]–
 had become interpreted as a version of the “mixed
constitution” which had had a long if complicated and until then
relatively minor history as an idea in the works of Thucydides, Plato,
and Aristotle (Hahm 2009). An influential account of Rome as such a
mixed constitution, in this case combining the three classical regime
forms of monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy, had already been given
by the Greek historian Polybius, who referred to the distinction
between the characteristic powers in each kind of regime and their
mutual checking and balancing (Histories 6.11–18; see
von Fritz 1954). Whereas in Polybius the achievement of balance
between the different powers was portrayed as resulting from mutual
rivalrous self-assertion, Cicero would refer to it in more harmonious
language, a form of balancing (compensatio, De rep.
II. 57) with the ideas of mixing and tempering paramount, as observed
by E.M. Atkins (2000: 491). (For a useful overview of Roman political
thought, see J.W. Atkins 2018.)

According to Polybius, each element of the constitution exercised a
distinctive form of power. The elected consuls wielded
imperium, a form of executive command; the Senate enjoyed the
power to deliberate and consent to specific policies; and the popular
assemblies served as the source of authoritative law, also electing
the magistrates, including the popular tribunes who in turn exercised
veto powers over the Senate. An originally republican formula relating
the consuls to the people as the source of authoritative law survives
in a complete prescript of the Augustan period: “Titus Quinctius
Crispinus [consul] lawfully asked the people, and the people lawfully
resolved,” as translated in Lintott 1999: 3. Moreover, the
tumultuous personal quest for office and influence led many
aristocrats and politically ambitious men to seek support among the
people, sometimes with radical measures of land reform which Cicero,
among others, would resolutely oppose. The theorizing of the proper
role of aristocratic leadership and Senatorial independence, together
with Platonic analogies for the requisite concord and harmony in the
city, would become central themes of Cicero’s political
philosophy, as he wrote: “What the musicians call harmony with
respect to song is concord in the state, the tightest and best bond of
safety in every republic; and that concord can never exist without
justice” (De rep. II.69.)
6.1 Cicero: Life

Marcus Tullius Cicero (106–43 BCE) was the most famous
“homo novus” or new man of Roman politics, hailing from a
minor provincial landowning family rather than the great clans of
hereditary nobility. He rose to the office of consul and the lifetime
Senatorial membership it subsequently conferred by his audacious wit
as a lawyer and orator in public prosecutions. His greatest moment as
consul in 63 BCE came in exposing a conspiracy by Catiline; the brutal
suppression of the conspiracy by executing Roman citizens without
trial, however, would tar his political legacy. He became an enemy of
Julius Caesar (though accepting a pardon from him at the end of a
stretch of civil wars in 47 BCE), seeing the assertion of power first
by Caesar and then Marc Antony as fatal to the republic. Having
defended in his De officiis the kind of tyrannicide that he
took the killing of Caesar in 44 BCE to have constituted, and attacked
Antony mercilessly in his series of fourteen Philippics the
following year, Cicero was murdered in response by partisans of the
then-ruling Triumvirate to which Antony belonged.

The writings of Cicero were virtually canonized subsequent to his
death as classic models of rhetoric and philosophy; as Richard Tuck
(1990: 43) has remarked, “For fifteen hundred years, from the
fourth century to the nineteenth, schoolchildren in Europe were
exposed daily to two books. One was the Bible, and the other was the
works of Cicero.” His many speeches and letters are themselves
of considerable political and often philosophical interest, reworking
the evaluative vocabulary of Roman law and politics in ways which
suited his overarching (and changing) political purposes (for a
critical assessment, see Gildenhard 2011, which concludes that
“In his rhetoric Cicero...consistently refused to recognize the
positions of his adversaries as genuine political positions and
challenged their identities as senatorial peers, Roman citizens, or
even human beings ”(Gildenhard 2011: 390). While his
philosophical writings—composed for the most part as a student
of philosophy in Rome and Athens, and then in a brief period
(46–44 BCE) when political developments led him to retreat from
active public life—cover a wide range of topics, including for
example, among those especially relevant to politics are two works on
the political role of the orator and the nature of oratory or
rhetoric, celebrating the moral purposes of the orator as essential to
the success of republican government.

While Cicero adhered to a moderate skepticism in general philosophical
matters, he would draw on a number of Stoic ideas in formulating his
own ethical and political teachings: these were shaped by the lectures
he had attended by the Stoic Posidonius in Rhodes, the writings of
Posidonius’ teacher Panaetius and other earlier and contemporary
Stoic texts, as well as (we may speculate) conversation with the Stoic
Diodotus whom he accommodated in his household in Rome for many years.
In particular, Cicero emphasized the Stoic themes of the natural
affinity for society and the existence of natural law. At the same
time, Platonic themes and models were also important in his political
writings (for overall interpretations, Atkins 2020, Schofield 2021).
The discussion below is limited to the two dialogues which are
explicitly modeled on Plato’s Republic and
Laws, titled by Cicero in Latin De re publica and
De legibus ( On the Commonwealth and On the
Laws), together with his most important work on political ethics,
the De officiis (On Duties), which exercised
particular influence on subsequent Western moral and political
thought.
6.2 De re publica

De re publica was composed by Cicero between 54 and 51 BCE, a
turbulent period of strife in Roman politics. Its dramatic setting is
in 129 BCE during the crisis caused by Tiberius Gracchus, a consul who
had championed a property redistribution law for the people and whom
members of the Senate had violently suppressed as a putative threat to
Roman civil order. All of it except the “Dream of Scipio”
(Book VI) was lost from the Middle Ages onward; it has been
reconstructed from references and excerpts in later authors,
supplemented by a palimpsest of much of Books I–III discovered
in 1819. Framed as a dialogue between Scipio Aemilianus, a hero of the
resistance against Tiberius Gracchus and his like-minded brother, and
several others of his actual contemporaries, the dialogue has a
discernible structure identified by E.M. Atkins (2000: 490): Books
I–II treat “the best condition of the res
publica”; Books III–IV treat “justice and human
nature”, topics common to the best city and the best citizen;
and Books V–VI treat the “best citizen’ in
discussing the statesman and in the Dream of Scipio.

While justice was for Cicero, as for the Greeks, the fundamental bond
of the commonwealth, he offered distinctive and influential linked
definitions of the res publica (”commonwealth“,
or more literally the ”public thing“) as the res
populi, the ”property/thing of the people“, and of a
populus or ”people“ in turn as ”an
assemblage associated with one another by agreement on
“law” [iuris consensu] and community of interest
[utilitatis communione]“ (both, I.39). This could be
interpreted either as a strong normative claim—the people agree
on ”law“ [ius], also translatable as right or
justice, and share a common interest—or alternatively in a
weaker deflationary manner, the people nominally accepting a common
law and sharing a common conception of their self-interest which may
or may not be in accord with
 justice.[14]
 Such ambiguity would be famously exploited by Augustine, who used
Cicero’s definition to argue that lacking justice, conflicted
and divided republican Rome had been no commonwealth, before offering
his own even weaker definition of a ”people“ as those
united in (any) common love (City of God, II.21). In
Cicero’s own hands, the definitions were used to stress that the
commonwealth was the property of the people, who entrusted it to the
magistrates to be used for the common good (I.51–2), and that
the ”welfare of the people is the supreme law“
(”salus populi suprema lex“, De leg. III.8; this
was a reference to a maxim in the ancient ”Twelve Tables“
compendium of Roman law). It followed too that just as Plato denied
the title of a (single unified) regime to the imperfect regimes torn
by civil discord, so Cicero inferred that a corrupt regime was not
strictly speaking a res publica at all (III.43–48). The
role of the statesman (rector rei publicae) is to aim at the
happiness of the citizens, defined in a laxer way than most Greek
philosophers would allow, as wealth, true glory, and virtue all
combined.

The character Scipio adheres to Greek philosophical principles in
declaring that ”the commonwealth cannot possibly function
without justice“ (II.70), adhering to the standard abstract
definition in an Aristotelian vein of justice as ”giving each
their due“ (ius suum cuique tribuere). In Book III, two
other dialogue participants present respectively the famous arguments
given on one day for justice, and on the next day against justice, by
the skeptical Greek philosopher and ambassador to Rome Carneades
during the embassy in 156/155 BCE mentioned above. Cicero’s
presentation reverses the order, no doubt to give justice the last
word.

In Cicero’s hands, Carneades’ case against justice avails
itself of the nomos/phusis contrast and of the kind of
ambition for power expressed by Plato’s character Callicles in
the Gorgias. Justice is not natural, as it differs radically
among different peoples; it conflicts with wisdom, which tells us
”to rule over as many people as possible, to enjoy pleasures, to
be powerful, to rule, to be a lord“ (III.24b), and it is fatal
for states and empires, which can’t survive without injustice.
In reply, the speech for justice avails itself of Stoic themes:
”true law is right reason, consonant with nature“; there
is ”one eternal and unchangeable law“ [i.e. what has come
to be known as ”natural law“] (III.33). This includes rule
of the best over the weakest for the benefit of the latter (III.36):
as in Plato’s Republic, the justice of rulership is not
exploitation but paternalistic benefit. And as in Plato’s
Republic Book X, where the myth of Er supplies a revisionary
religious justification for justice (it will help you to choose your
next reincarnation well), so Cicero’s Republic
concludes with a dream recounted by Scipio Aemilianus about his even
more eminent Roman ancestor, Scipio Africanus. The dream describes the
divine order which not only rewards humans for just service to their
city (VI.13), but also puts human affairs in a cosmic perspective
designed to embolden them to care more for justice than for petty
human advantage:

you must always look at these heavenly bodies and scorn what is human.
What fame can you achieve in what men say, or what glory can you
achieve that is worth seeking?” (VI.20)

In a dramatic rejection even of the traditional Roman motives of honor
and glory as conventional motivations to virtue, the imagined elder
statesman asks: “…and even the people who talk about
us—how long will they do that?” (VI.21). As Jed W. Atkins
has observed (2013:76), glory is in the Dream “first devalued,
and then revalued”, in a Platonically inspired image of
“the glory of the heavenly realm to which good statesmen will
return” (2013: 77–78).
6.3 De legibus

De legibus, or On the Laws, is also written as a
dialogue, but one set in Cicero’s own day with himself, his
brother, and closest friend as the interlocutors, gathered at his
country estate of Arpinum. Probably begun after De re
publica, it was likewise written in the years immediately before
51 BCE, and similarly survives only in piecemeal and fragmentary form.
Books I–II treat natural law or ius naturae, with
“Marcus” (Cicero himself) declaring that “law is the
highest reason, rooted in nature” (I.18), and that men, bound to
the gods by reason, are “born for justice”
(I.28–32). However, “the corruption of bad
habits…extinguishes…the sparks given by nature”
(I.33) and can result in the formation of bad laws. Such iniquitous
laws as those passed by tyrants are not just (I.42); nor is the title
of law to be conferred upon “what bandits have agreed among
themselves” (II.13).

In Books II–III, the speakers prescribe an ideal law code, based
on but modifying Roman law; notably, for example, the institution of
the tribunate is defended (III.16–17). As these prescriptions,
and the circumstances of their writing (a temporary retreat from
active politics), suggest, Cicero had a complex attitude to the Greek
dilemma posing the lives of philosophy and of politics as opposed
alternatives. He saw philosophy as a source of insight and perspective
relevant to politics, but after his early studies, devoted himself to
it primarily when temporarily debarred from more active pursuits. One
might say that philosophy became, beyond its intrinsic value, a form
of alternative public service when the forum was too dangerous for him
to enter (here following the reflection along these lines offered by
Baraz 2012).
6.4 De Officiis

“The De officiis, not the De re publica, is
Cicero’s Republic” (Long 1995: 240). This dictum
of A. A. Long holds true not only in the sense that for Cicero, as for
Plato and Aristotle, ethics was inseparable from politics. It is true
also and more profoundly insofar as the De officiis takes up
the same subject as Plato’s Republic, namely the
apparent conflict between justice and individual advantage, and
proposes broadly the same resolution, namely that the conflict is only
ever apparent: violating one’s officia or duties can
never serve one’s advantage so long as both are properly
understood. Book I treats what is virtuous, or honestas; Book
II treats what is advantageous, or utilitas; and Book III
considers cases to show that any apparent conflict is illusory.

The most difficult case to resolve according to the overall argument
of the book is that of advantage when understood as political
ambition, driven by greatness of spirit. As Cicero acknowledges, and
as was especially true in the highest echelons of Roman society,
“Men are led most of all to being overwhelmed by forgetfulness
of justice when they slip into desiring positions of command or honour
or glory” (I.26). The solution is to aim only at true glory,
such as can be gained only through the fulfillment of one’s
officia. Similar casuistry enables Cicero to resolve in
accordance with his thesis a range of common cases where advantage
might be sought at the expense of justice (in administering the estate
of an orphan, for example, a common duty of eminent Romans). Yet such
casuistry is always advanced within a context of celebration of
justice and natural law: it is not simply that in fact justice never
conflicts with advantage, but that justice properly understood is
always to one’s advantage as a human being.

As in Plato, a redefinition of the virtues plays a crucial role in the
overall argument for the benefits of justice. For Cicero, the virtues
are Romanized as officia, understood not only as duties in
the abstract but rather as obligations of role or relationship, each
attaching to someone in virtue of a distinct persona (whether
as father, consul, neighbor, and so on, or simply as a human being).
Some virtues are rooted in one’s persona as a human
being subject to natural law, others in the specific roles and customs
of one’s city. Four principal virtues are identified: wisdom;
justice, resting on fides (good faith and credit) and respect
for property; greatness of spirit; and decorum. Respect for property
is a keystone of Cicero’s political thought, here very far from
the current in Platonism which subordinated property to civic
harmony.

Strikingly, whereas tyrannicide might appear to be a difficult case
for such an ethical code to confront, Cicero presents it—writing 
later in the year that Caesar was assassinated—as the
straightforwardly ethically correct choice. Cicero couches his case in
Stoic terms of naturalness and fellowship (Dyck 1996, ad loc.
to Off.III.29–32). His pivotal move is to deny that
tyrants are party to the otherwise universal nature of human
fellowship. Thus he asserts that “there can be no fellowship
between us and tyrants…just as some limbs are amputated if they
are…harming other parts of the body, similarly if the wildness
and monstrousness of a beast appears in human form, it must be removed
from the common humanity…of the body”
(Off.III.32: ostensibly about the tyrant Phalaris).
7. Political Philosophy in the Roman Empire

Although Rome ruled over an empire long before Cicero died, and the
republican constitution that he had served would remain formally
intact in many respects long after that date as well, the imperial era
of Roman government is standardly associated with the elevation of
Octavian by the Senate in 27 BCE by according him the title of
“Augustus” (among other novel titles and combinations of
offices that he was then and later accorded). Octavian and a number of
his successors were also referred to as the princeps,
literally the first man, implicitly the first among nominal equals,
sometimes translated by the English derivation ‘prince’,
and so giving rise to the description of the period from 27
BCE–284 CE as the Principate (to be followed in turn by the
Dominate). In this period, Stoicism continued to exercise an important
hold, drawing in part on the Hellenistic genre of advice to kings;
Platonism too, and forms of Pythagoreanism, regained much sway.
Moreover, a number of Stoic-minded writers and orators played their
parts in Roman political life, some fashioning the life of a
philosopher itself into a distinctive form of what might be called
non-political politics (Trapp 2007). In this article, I cannot explore
the full ramifications of these philosophical developments under the
Empire, in writers in Greek as well as in Latin, and influencing not
only pagan but also Jewish and Christian thinkers. The article also
leaves aside the many and varied important contributions to political
thought in Rome and its possessions made not by philosophers but by
historians, including Livy, Sallust, Diodorus Siculus, Tacitus, and
Suetonius. (Again, for an overview that seeks to integrate political
and historical developments with political theorizing, see J.W. Atkins
2018.)
7.1 Later Stoicism

If Cicero as a new man made senator had to contend with the
competitive pressures of republican politics, Seneca (c. 3
BCE–65 CE), as a new man (from Spain) made senator a century
later, had to contend with the problem of advising, and surviving, the
poisonous politics of intimacy with the princeps. For Seneca,
Stoic philosophy (of which he was an avowed exponent, though other
philosophical influences can also be found in his ideas), can be best
squared with politics if the ruler is supremely virtuous: in that
case, the Stoic wise man is the king or prince.

Like Cicero, Seneca wrote essays in natural as well as political
philosophy, including for example a significant analysis of the give
and take of benefits or reciprocal gifts and favors in political life
(De beneficiis, recently translated afresh by Griffin and
Inwood, 2011), and even a De officiis (which is lost). Like
Cicero, he wrote important collections of letters (and where Cicero
wrote poetry, Seneca also wrote plays). The letters include his
distinctive “consolations” which would inaugurate a new
philosophical and literary genre (see the entry on
 Seneca).

In this large corpus, arguably his most important surviving work for
political philosophy is his De clementia (“On
Mercy”), addressed to the emperor Nero whom he served as tutor
(in rhetoric, not in philosophy) and later in the capacity of
officially designated amicus or friend (Veyne 2003, vii, 19).
Presented as a “mirror” in which Nero could see himself
and the consequences of his virtue (1.1.1), this text would become a
fountainhead of the “mirror for princes” genre in
subsequent centuries. The challenge was how to reconcile the virtue of
justice with that of clementia, clemency or mercy, a
distinctively Roman virtue (not corresponding exactly to any Greek
word: Braund 2009, 33) that had been incorporated into public life as
a virtue of the Roman people (clementia populi Romani) and
attributed specifically in cultic form to Caesar Augustus (previously
Octavian) as clementia Caesaris (included as one of
“the four virtues attributed to Augustus on an honorific
shield,” as observed by Griffin 2000: 540; see more generally
Flamerie de Lachapelle 2011). Appealing to the related Stoic virtue of
philanthrôpia in Greek, humanitas in Latin, or
love of humankind, Seneca claimed that, by taking into account all the
circumstances of the affair, clemency can claim to embody, as it were,
a more perfect justice (iustissimum), than would the
observance of the strict letter of the law (2.7.3, as discussed by
Braund 2009, 66–70).

Seneca manages to defend clemency’s claim to the rank of virtue
by distinguishing it both from its opposite, crudelitas or
cruelty, and from a related disposition, misericordia, pity
or compassion, which for the Stoics counted as a vice (2.4.4). The
Stoic sage will exercise clemency by attending to the circumstances
and causes of the criminal’s act, but also by seeking in various
ways to improve the latter’s character (1.14.1–3,
1.16.1–3), an approach that goes back at least to Plato
(Prt. 324a–c, Grg.469a–b), doing so with
parsimony and discernment between those who are curable and those who
are not (again with Plato, Grg.525a–526b). Indeed,
Seneca asserts that those who are curable will generally strive
subsequently to become worthy of the clemency shown to them by the
prince (2.2.1), a principle illustrated by the story of
Augustus’ clemency toward the conspirator Cnaeus Cornelius
Cinna, who would become his lifelong friend (1.9). In good Stoic
fashion, Seneca finally shows that the virtue of clemency is both
valuable in itself and also beneficial. It sustains the rule of a
prince by inspiring love in his subjects (1.19.6), whereas cruelty
augments the number of his enemies (1.8.7). And conversely, whereas
misericordia wallows in a wrongful and inefficient emotional
pity for the treatment that justice would prescribe of the criminal
(2.6.1), clemency improves the criminal more efficiently than cruelty
would do (1.22.1), and for this and other reasons better aims at the
good of mankind. It is worth noting finally that, while Seneca
specifies that clemency should also extend to slaves, his
cosmopolitanism stopped short of advocating their manumission or the
abolition of slavery (Griffin 1992:
 256–85).[15]

Seneca did not limit himself to the political function of advising
rulers. Instead, he conceived the role of philosophy as benefiting
people generally, in the widest sense of a cosmopolitan ethics and
even politics. His De otio (“On Leisure”)
contrasts the single commonwealth embracing gods and men in a cosmic
citizenship, with the ordinary multiple commonwealths to which the
accidents of birth assign us (though these also rightly command
allegiance) (4.1). Should such an ordinary regime turn lethal, the
philosopher remains a citizen of the cosmic commonwealth, and so his
serenity can and should remain intact. That fate befell Seneca himself
in 65 CE, when Nero accused him of conspiring in a planned
assassination of the emperor and ordered him to commit suicide. To be
sure, however, Seneca’s suicide reflected not only political
obedience, but also, and perhaps more fundamentally, the belief,
previously expressed in his writings (in particular De
providentia and De ira, as well as his letters) that
suicide is a supreme mark of freedom. No tyranny can so enslave us as
to take away this freedom: a freedom to act based on the inner
liberation of realizing that death and other worldly losses are in
fact indifferent and irrelevant to happiness (Inwood 2005:
307–9).

Seneca was far from the only Stoic politically active in his day or in
successive generations. Others like Thrasea Paetus and Barea Soranus
under Nero, Helvidius Priscus under Vespasian, and Paconius Agrippinus
under Tiberius, chose to defy those whom they saw as tyrannical
rulers, becoming known as the so-called ‘Stoic martyrs’.
(On the varieties of Stoicism under the principate, see the classic
study of Brunt 2013, originally published in 1975.) Some Stoics spoke
out against a wider range of customs that they took to be cruel or
unfounded or otherwise irrational, most notably Musonius Rufus against
such practices as the Athenians’ holding of gladiatorial games
in the same theatre of Dionysus where they celebrated religious
festivals (assuming that it is indeed he who is described in Dio
Chrysostom’s Orationes XXXI, 122), and against the
social convention of excluding women from philosophizing (for his
fragments, see King 2011). Yet these later Stoics made rather few
detailed contributions to political philosophy, even if their
fundamental analysis of living according to nature and reason, as
further developed by figures ranging from the once-enslaved Epictetus
to the emperor Marcus Aurelius, remained an important touchstone for
thinking about politics.
7.2 Platonisms and Other Philosophies in the Empire

While the men of affairs in the Roman Senate and imperial court turned
often (though not exclusively) to Stoicism, in the Greek centers of
philosophy and among provincial Greek men of affairs Platonism
remained an important framework for thinking about both ethics and
politics, as did a related if somewhat shadowy form of
 Pythagoreanism
 which can be seen as a continuation of the genre of Hellenistic
kingship treatises (Centrone 2000). The most important contributions
made to political thought by the Platonist philosopher of the
second-century AD, Plutarch (c.46–c.120 CE), are his paired
biographical lives of Greek and Roman statesmen, each with a
comparison drawing political morals. Together with the histories of
Thucydides, Livy and Sallust, these Lives instructed
generations of students in the principles and perils of political
ethics, and instituted the distinction between statesman and demagogue
as we have come to know it today: with figures like the fifth-century
BCE Athenian “Aristides the Just” embodying the ideal
statesmen, in contrast to the Platonic view of all past and present
statesmen as fatally flawed. Plutarch also made important
contributions to political philosophy in the many essays collected in
his volumes of Moralia.

Plutarch was a committed but in some ways revisionist Platonist. His
attitude to public life was more Roman than Platonic (befitting the
role in public affairs that he played in his own city): the political
life was for him unproblematically noble, not inferior to the life of
philosophy. Similarly, he revised the strict Platonic dictum that
philosophers must rule by allowing that philosophers might rule merely
in the sense of advising rulers, not of being rulers themselves. (In
fact, this move had some Platonic pedigree in the
Statesman’s insistence that the science of statecraft
is the same whether known and exercised by an advisor or by an actual
ruler (259a).) And he considered philosophy to be more of a
character-building study than a source of knowledge of exact or
politically relevant knowledge. Where statesmen were educated in
philosophy, as for example in the Lives of Pericles, Cicero,
Brutus, and Cato Minor, he treats this as valuable mainly because of
the virtue—in particular, moderation and
self-restraint—which it imparts to them (Van Raalte 2005). The
study of philosophy serves as a sort of inoculation against greed and
immoderate ambition. But it need not impart any particular substantive
knowledge to the statesman (so competing philosophies could all be
useful in shaping virtue: Anaxagaorean influence on Pericles, an
eclectic mixture of Stoicism, Academic skepticism, and Platonism on
Cicero; Stoicism on the younger Cato). Indeed, excessively rigid
adherence to a philosophy could be deleterious, making a statesman
rigid and inflexible. The younger Cato was defeated when he stood for
the consulship because, Plutarch says, he experienced the same thing
that happens to fruits that appear “out of season”
(Phoc. 3.1). Like such fruits, he was admired, but “the
weight and grandeur” of his virtue was “out of all
proportion to the immediate times” (asummetron tois
kathestōsi kairois, Phoc. 3.2–3).

Plutarch’s political sympathies lay with monarchy. He treated
the exemplary Greek or Roman statesman as inherently and ideally a
kind of monarchical figure, even when functioning within a democratic
or republican environment. “Aristocratic and kingly” was
his praise for Pericles’ type of true statesmanship (literally,
his “politics” or “policy”,
politeia), once he has given up his initial recourse to
demagogic methods (Per.14.2). Thus for all his admiration for
Greek statesmen of the classical age, and his profound later influence
on republican sentiments in Europe, Plutarch preferred monarchy as the
best constitution and believed that he was following his master Plato
in so doing. As John Dillon puts it, he held “that the
accomplished statesman, like a first-rate musician, will be able to
make the best of any of the three basic constitutions [monarchy,
aristocracy, or democracy] that he is given to work on” (Dillon
1997). To quote Plutarch himself on this point from his fragmentary
writing “On Monarchy, Democracy, and Oligarchy”:

…if he [the statesman] is given the choice among governments,
like so many tools, he would follow Plato’s advice and choose no
other than monarchy, the only one which is able to sustain that top
note of virtue, high in the highest sense, and never let it be tuned
down under compulsion or expediency. For the other forms of government
in a certain sense, although controlled by the statesman, control him,
and although carried along by him, carry him along, since he has no
firmly established strength to oppose those from whom his strength is
derived…. (Peri mon. 827bc)


Plato’s collective virtuous aristocracy in the Republic
(his philosopher-kings and -queens, in the plural), was transmuted by
Plutarch, perhaps under the influence of the singular kingly political
expert in the Statesman, into a monarchical
 ideal.[16]

Later Platonic philosophers, known as Neoplatonists (see the entry on
 Plotinus),
 also focused primarily on ethics in the context of cosmology and
theology, stressing the ascent of the soul to a disembodied pure
understanding of the One. Yet they made room for the political virtues
of the embodied soul as a first step in this process of divinization
or “becoming like God” (O’Meara 2003). In working
out the political implications of such views, Plato’s
Laws became an important model for theocratic political
reform, especially as Neoplatonism became influential for a certain
strand of Christian thinkers, in particular those able to absorb the
translation of Greek texts into Arabic.
8. Conclusion

On a continuum of political rule stretching from the sheer domination
of some over others on one extreme, to a vision of collaborative
deliberation among equals for the sake of the good life on the other,
many ancient Greek and Roman political philosophers clearly staked out
the latter ground. The very idea of the city and the civic bond as
rooted in justice was common ground across much of the spectrum of
ancient political philosophy. Even the Epicureans saw society as
rooted in justice, although understanding justice in turn as rooted in
 utility.[17]
 Philosophers adhering to this approach were not however ignorant of
possible objections to it. The diagnosis of politics as domination has
never been more powerfully advanced than by Plato’s character
Thrasymachus, nor has the attack on justice as a good life for the
individual ever been as powerfully made as by Plato’s character
Callicles or the skeptic Carneades. The nostalgic view of ancient
political philosophy as predicated on widely shared conceptions of
human nature and the human good, before the splintering and fracturing
of modernity, is an oversimplification.

It is true that those ancient visions of politics which rooted
themselves in a commitment to ethical cultivation and the common good
did not have to contend with the absolutist claims of rival versions
of monotheistic religions. But the ancients did have to answer various
forms of relativism, immoralism, and skepticism, contending with rival
philosophical schools which disagreed profoundly with one another. If
some of them chose to see politics as a domain of common benefit and a
space for the cultivation of virtue, this was not because it had not
occurred to them that it could be thought of otherwise, but in part
because they had developed powerful philosophical systems to support
this view. The experience and practices of the Greek poleis
(the plural of polis) and the Roman res publica
played important roles in shaping these approaches.

Plato and Aristotle can in many ways be seen as defending some
fundamental tenets of Greek ethics (such as the value of justice), but
doing so by means of advancing revisionist philosophical doctrines and
distancing themselves from the ways in which those tenets were
interpreted by the democratic institutions of their day. The range of
ethical and political views which they, along with their Hellenistic
successors, laid out, continue to define many of the fundamental
choices for modern philosophy, despite the many important innovations
in institutional form and intellectual approach which have been made
since. Many of those innovations, indeed, came in response to a
revival of the ancient skeptical and relativist challenges: challenges
already known from their evolution within ancient political philosophy
itself.


====================================================================================================
TITLE: Animalism
====================================================================================================
TOC:



1. Formulating Animalism

1.1 Our Fundamental Nature
1.2 Our Persistence

2. The Lockean Legacy

2.1 Locke’s Human/Person Distinction
2.2 Animalism and the Human/Person Distinction
2.3 Animalism(s) vs. Neo-Lockeanism(s)

3. Arguments for and Objections to Animalism

3.1 Thinking Animal Argument
3.2 Replies to the Thinking Animal Argument
3.3 Animal Ancestors Argument
3.4 Further Objections, Implications, and Questions

Bibliography
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries





TEXT:

1. Formulating Animalism

Despite its Aristotelian heritage, animalism is a relative newcomer to
the personal identity debate. While early intimations of the view can
be found in work by Wiggins (1980) and Wollheim (1984), those
primarily responsible for injecting the view into the contemporary
debate over personal identity include Ayers (1991), Carter (1989,
1999), Olson (1997), Snowdon (1990, 1991, 1995), and van Inwagen
(1990). Though its supporters appear to remain in the minority,
animalism has since attracted other advocates, including Bailey (2016,
2017), Blatti (2012), DeGrazia (2005), Hacker (2007), Hershenov
(2005a), D. Mackie (1999a,b), Merricks (2001), and Wiggins (2001).
Notable critics include Baker (2000, 2016), Johnston (2007, 2016),
McMahan (2002), Noonan (1998, 1989 [2019]), Parfit (2012), and S.
Shoemaker (1999, 2011, 2016), among others.

The name ‘animalism’ was conferred by Snowdon (1991: 109)
and has been widely adopted. The view is also sometimes referred to as
“the organism view” (e.g., Liao 2006), the
“biological criterion” (e.g., D. Shoemaker 2009), or
“the biological approach” (e.g., Olson 1997).
1.1 Our Fundamental Nature

Animalism’s hallmark claim concerns our basic metaphysical
nature: whether we are material or immaterial; simple or composite;
substance, property, process, or event; organic or inorganic; etc. In
this context, the animalist asserts simply:

(1′)
We are animals.


Despite its plainness, (1′) is easily misinterpreted (for
discussion, see D. Mackie 1999b: 230–33; Olson 2003:
318–21; and Snowdon 2014: ch. 1). According to the intended
reading, the ‘we’ picks out human persons such as you and
me. Nevertheless, (1′) should not be taken to assert that
all persons are animals. It leaves open the possibilities of
both non-animal people (e.g., robots, angels, aliens, deities) and
human animals that are not people (e.g., patients in persistent
vegetative states, human fetuses). The ‘are’ reflects the
‘is’ of numerical identity. Consequently, animalism is not
the view that each of us is “constituted by” a particular
organism, in the way that a statue is sometimes said to be
non-identically constituted by the hunk of matter with which it
coincides (see
 section 2.3).
 Nor still should (1′) be understood to claim that each of us
has a body that is an animal—as if you were one thing
and your animal body another. Finally, ‘animals’ refers to
biological organisms—members of the primate species Homo
sapiens. While participants on both sides of the debate over
animalism tend to treat these terms interchangeably, some prominent
critics distinguish ‘animals’ from ‘organisms’
and deny that these terms co-refer (e.g., Johnston 2007: 55–56,
S. Shoemaker 2011: 353).

Expressed in logical notation and individualized, (1′) is
sometimes presented in the following form:

(1″)
\(\Box (\forall x) (x \text{ is a human person} \rightarrow 
		x \text{ is an animal})\).


This says: necessarily, for any object x, if x is a
human person, then x is an animal, i.e., necessarily, human
persons are animals. While neither (1′) nor (1″) is
unproblematic (see, e.g., Johansson 2007 and Toner 2011), it is clear
enough what they do not suggest. According to the animalism
account of our most fundamental nature, we are not

 immaterial souls or egos (Descartes; Foster 1991);
 material bodies (Thomson 1997; Williams 1957);
 body-soul complexes (Swinburne 1984);
 bundles of mental states (Hume; Rovane 1998; S. Campbell
2006);
 material simples (Chisholm 1978 [1989]; Lowe 1996, 2001);
 parts of brains (Puccetti 1973; McMahan 2002);
 persons materially constituted by, but nonidentical with, animals
(S. Shoemaker 1999; Baker 2000; Johnston 2007); or
 nothing at all (Unger 1979a,b; cf. Unger 1990).


Having said that, this entry will focus primarily on animalism’s
positive assertions, rather than on animalist criticisms of each of
its rival views. The interested reader is directed to Olson 2007 and
Snowdon 2014, which not only include qualified defenses of (1), but
also raise a host of criticisms of the foregoing
alternatives—criticisms that, if not motivated by an acceptance
of (1), are at least consistent with its truth.

It bears mention that animalism is sometimes formulated slightly
differently as:

(1‴)
We are essentially animals.


On this construal, animalism is the view that we could not exist
except as animals. Indeed, some have alleged that a commitment to
(1′) is insufficient to qualify anyone as an animalist and that
this label should be reserved only for those committed to
both (1′) and (1‴) (Belshaw 2011: 401; cf. Olson
2007: 26–27, Snowdon 1990). Insistence on this point is probably
innocuous, however, since most philosophers accept that all animals
(human and otherwise) are essentially animals, in which case,
(1‴) follows immediately from (1′).

(1)
Unless otherwise noted, in what follows, ‘(1)’ will 
	be treated as referring equivocally to (1′), (1″), and 
	(on the assumption that all animals are essentially animals) 
	(1‴).

1.2 Our Persistence

While it is a claim about our fundamental nature that is most readily
associated with the name, animalism also incorporates a view about our
persistence. Stated in its most general form, this view asserts the
following:

(2)
The conditions
whose satisfaction is necessary and sufficient for a past or future
being to be identical with a human person that exists now just are
those whose satisfaction is necessary and sufficient for a past or
future being to be identical with an animal that exists
now.


All animalists subscribe to (2), so far as it goes. But it does not go
very far. What exactly are the conditions of (human) animal
continuity? Although animalists are mostly in agreement, there is a
subtle and seldom acknowledged rift between two camps of animalist
thinking about the answer to this question.

According to the first camp, remaining alive is both a necessary and a
sufficient condition for the persistence of human animals.
Human-animal persistence thus consists in the continuation of those
processes constitutive of biological life. As Olson puts it,
“one survives just in case one’s purely animal
functions—metabolism, the capacity to breathe and circulate
one’s blood, and the like—continue” (1997: 16). On
this view, an animal’s life is understood as


a self-organizing biological event that maintains the organism’s
complex internal structure. The materials that organisms are made up
of are intrinsically unstable and must therefore be constantly
repaired and renewed, or else the organism dies and its remains decay.
An organism must constantly take in new particles, reconfigure and
assimilate them into its living fabric, and expel those that are no
longer useful to it. An organism’s life enables it to persist
and retain its characteristic structure despite constant material
turnover. (Olson 2007: 28)


This first animalist answer to the persistence question, then, can be
glossed as follows:

(2a)
 Given a human
animal, x, existing at one time, \(t_1\), and something,
y, existing at a later time, \(t_2\), y is identical
with x if and only if y continues the life processes
previously undergone by x.


Once (2a) is conjoined with the animalist answer to the fundamental
nature question, (1), we have a view that might be labeled
“organic animalism”. Notable advocates of this view
include Olson and van Inwagen (1990). Of course, it follows from the
organicist view that death will constitute the end of our existence.
Whatever else may remain following our deaths, each of us will cease
to exist when we die. Indeed, strictly speaking on this view, there is
no such thing as a dead animal (or perhaps—if ‘dead’
is a non-attributive adjective like ‘fake’—that a
“dead animal” is not an animal).

Those in the second animalist camp deny that being alive is a
necessary condition for the persistence of human animals. On their
view, a human animal (like all organisms) is a functionally organized
physical object whose membership in a particular species is attributed
to its origin and structure. Only if it is so gruesome as to destroy
this structure will an organism’s death bring about its
nonexistence. We persist, David Mackie puts it, “as long as this
organisation of [our] constituent parts remains sufficiently nearly
intact” (1999b: 237).

But this focus on the functional organization of animal bodies should
be taken neither as discounting altogether the significance of the
life processes emphasized by organicists nor as affirming a
traditional bodily criterion of persistence. On the contrary, on this
view, a human animal’s 


life is both a consequence or inseparable function of its origin and
the continuing explanation of its structure and parts at any moment of
its existence. Life is essential to the thing in so far as it is
inconceivable that it (this thing) should have come into existence as
a non-living thing. (Ayers 1991: vol. 2: 224)


“But”, Ayers continues, “that is not to say that
when it dies the thing itself will cease to exist: merely that an
explanation of the existence and structure of the thing will then
refer to a life that is over” (ibid.).

In contrast with their organicist counterparts, these animalists
answer the persistence question along the following lines:


the persistence of biological organisms depends on their retaining
(enough of) the organisation of parts that is the product of their
natural biological development, and that makes them apt for life,
while stopping short of saying that life itself is necessary. (D.
Mackie 1999b: 236) 


In short:

(2b)
Given a human
animal, x, existing at one time, \(t_1\), and something,
y, existing at a later time, \(t_2\), y is identical
with x if and only if y retains a sufficient degree of
the life-apt structure of constituent parts previously exhibited by
x.


Hereafter, ‘somatic animalism’ will refer to the
conjunction of (1) and (2b). In addition to Ayers and Mackie, notable
somaticists include Carter (1989, 1999) and Feldman (1992).

It is worth emphasizing that the debate between somatic and organic
animalists is not merely verbal and that the sort of linguistic
evidence sometimes marshaled (e.g., by D. Mackie 1999b) is—while
germane—unlikely to settle the question at issue. The debate
between somaticist and organicist conceptions of the conditions of
animal continuity reflects a substantive (if, as yet, inadequately
explored) disagreement about the nature of (human) animals. (Are they
essentially living? How ought life itself be understood?) Moreover,
while the issue of whether something can be both an animal and dead
illustrates the somaticist-organicist debate, it is hardly
the only context in which that debate manifests itself. The same
debate could be illustrated when considering unborn human fetuses,
human animals in suspended animation, etc.
2. The Lockean Legacy

Toward the end of his magisterial two-volume commentary on John Locke,
Ayers writes that 


for all the transformation of our motives, indeed, of our general
philosophical theory … the debate on personal identity has
hardly moved on since the innovations of the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries. (1991: vol. 2: 281)


In a similar spirit, S. Shoemaker recently adapted Whitehead’s
famous remark, observing that “the history of the topic of
personal identity has been a series of footnotes to Locke”
(2008: 313). It is certainly undeniable that no single discussion of
personal identity has done more to shape the current debate than the
chapter titled “Of Identity and Diversity” that Locke
added to the second edition of his Essay Concerning Human
Understanding (II.xxvii). (Hereafter, all textual references to 
Locke are to this work, Locke 1689 [1975].) Also undeniable is the 
effect these
pages have had on the emergence of the animalist alternative to the
Lockean approach to personal identity. For whatever intuitive appeal
animalism may seem to have in our secular, post-Darwinian climate, in
the wake of Locke’s work, the falsity of animalism was long
taken for granted.
2.1 Locke’s Human/Person Distinction

From an animalist perspective, the most significant aspect of
Locke’s famous discussion is the sharp distinction he draws
between the human animal (“man”) and the person. Unlike a
mass of matter—which consists merely in “the Cohesion of
Particles … any how united” (II.xxvii.4)—a living
organism (e.g., oak tree, horse, human animal) is a structurally
complex material object whose functional organization is conducive to
continued life. A person, by contrast, is a 
“thinking intelligent Being, that has reason and reflection, and 
can
consider it self as it self, the same thinking thing in different
times and places; which it does by that consciousness, which is
inseparable from thinking” (II.xxvii.9).

By classifying “man” with other organisms and then drawing
a distinction between organisms and persons, Locke recognizes that he
is prying apart the traditional notion of “man” as
rational, on the one hand, and animal, on the other. Against this
traditional understanding, he introduces a thought experiment
involving a rational parrot (II.xxvii.8). Our unwillingness to call
this parrot a “man” simply because it is an animal
possessed of language and reason illustrates that not all rational
animals are men. Nor are all men rational animals: “whoever
should see a Creature of his own Shape and Make, though it had no more
reason all its Life, than a Cat or a Parrot, would
call him still a Man” (ibid.).  The human/person
distinction gains traction once it is coupled with one of
the Essay’s key insights, viz. that sortal concepts
(e.g., human animal, person) are often (though not
always) associated with different identity criteria.
“Identity”—as he puts it in the title of the section
in which this insight is first registered—is “suited to
the Idea”: “such as is the Idea
belonging to [a] Name, such must be the Identity”
(II.xxvii.7). Locke is keenly aware of the significance of this
principle; “if it had been a little more carefully attended
to”, he admonishes, it “would possibly have prevented a
great deal of that Confusion, which often occurs about this Matter
… especially concerning
Personal Identity” (ibid.).  And indeed, it is this
insight about the association of sortal concepts and identity criteria
that encourages the thought in Locke that human animals and persons
are governed by different criteria of identity. Whereas a human animal
persists just in case “the same continued Life [is] communicated
to different Particles of Matter, as they happen successively to be
united to that organiz’d living Body” (II.xxvii.8), when
one “consider[s] what Person stands for”, Locke
contends, one finds that its persistence consists in “the
sameness of a rational Being”. He explains: “as far as
this consciousness can be extended backwards to any past Action or
Thought, so far reaches the Identity of that
Person” (II.xxvii.9).

The impetus behind Locke’s human/person distinction was the
ongoing debate amongst seventeenth- and eighteenth-century theologians
and philosophers concerning the metaphysics of resurrection. Their
challenge was to account for the Biblical prediction that the dead
would be resurrected on judgment day. But what is it exactly that gets
resurrected? The physical particles associated with a living organism
are in a state of constant flux. The set of particles associated with
an organism changes from one moment to the next and may turnover
completely (perhaps several times) during the course of an
organism’s life. Moreover, whether due to decomposition and/or
because they are consumed by other organisms, the particles associated
with an organism at its death will be widely dispersed. These facts
alone make it unlikely, if not impossible, that the resurrection of
each individual will involve the reconstitution of that
individual’s former “body”. The human/person
distinction supplies Locke with the resources to resolve this problem
because, on his view, something is a person not because of
the material or immaterial substance in which it is grounded—a
question on which Locke remains steadfastly agnostic, though he is
inclined to think the underlying substance is immaterial
(II.xxvii.25)—but in virtue of the psychological capacities it
exercises, viz. self-consciousness and rationality. And a person
persists “as far as” the exercise of those capacities
“reaches” (II.xxvii.9): “For the same consciousness
being preserv’d, whether in the same or different Substances,
the personal Identity is preserv’d” (II.xxvii.13).  Thus
the way is clear for Locke to assert that one and the same person may
be resurrected even if that person comes to inhabit an altogether
different body than any with which she was previously associated
(II.xxvii.15).

It is in the context of his solution to this problem that Locke
introduces the famous thought experiment involving the prince and the
cobbler—not as a puzzle in need of explanation, but as a case
whose apparent plausibility vindicates the human/person distinction
(and thereby, his solution to the problem of the resurrection). If

“the soul of the prince, carrying with it the consciousness of
the Prince’s past Life, [were to] enter and inform the Body of a
Cobler as soon as deserted by his own Soul”, Locke enjoins his
reader, “every one sees, he would be the same Person
with the Prince, accountable only for the Prince’s Actions: But
who would say it was the same Man?” (II.xxvii.15, emphasis
added).  This thought experiment is often taken to support a
psychological criterion of personal identity. The precise form of such
a criterion has been the subject of much dispute, both in
Locke’s time and subsequently. Locke himself is sometimes said
(probably incorrectly) to have advocated a memory criterion, according
to which a person,
x, existing at one time, \(t_1\), and a person, y,
existing at a later time, \(t_2\), y is identical with x
if and only if y remembers experiences had by x. Whether
or not this was Locke’s view, generally speaking, psychological
criteria of personal identity assert that a psychological relation of
some sort (i.e. a relation involving memory, characteristics and
dispositions, beliefs, desires, rationality, etc.) is necessary and/or
sufficient for each of us to persist through time.

Another important dimension of the human/person distinction is also
signaled in this example, viz. the person as locus of moral
accountability. On Locke’s view, it is in virtue of their
capacities for self-consciousness and rationality that persons not
only persist through time, but also are prudentially concerned and
morally and legally responsible for actions committed at other times.
According to Locke, a person should be punished only for those actions
that she can remember having committed (II.xxvii.20). This is true not
only in the case of divine law carried out on judgment day—when
“the secrets of all Hearts shall be laid open”
and rewards and punishments meted out for the good and bad deeds
undertaken throughout the course of our lives (II.xxvii.26)—but
also, more generally, in the course of everyday legal and moral
affairs. So it is that ‘person’ functions as “a
Forensick Term appropriating Actions and their Merit” (ibid.)
and in “personal Identity is founded all the Right and
Justice of Reward and Punishment” (II.xxvii.18).

In discussing these normative aspects of personhood, Locke raises and
answers an obvious objection in a way that anticipates some strains of
the contemporary debate. “Suppose”, he says,


I wholly lose the memory of some parts of my Life, beyond a
possibility of retrieving them, so that perhaps I shall never be
conscious of them again; yet am I not the same Person, that did those
Actions, had those Thoughts, that I was once conscious of, though I
have now forgot them? (II.xxvii.20)


Locke replies that, although they typically refer to both the same
human animal and the same person, self-referring personal pronouns can
be equivocal. So the question “Did I do such and so?” can
be ambiguous as between “Did the person to which ‘I’
presently refers do such and so?” and “Did the human
animal to which ‘I’ presently refers do such and
so?” In Locke’s amnesiac case, the answer to the first
question is no, while the answer to the second question is yes:
“the Word I is applied to … the Man only”
(ibid.).

Two aspects of Locke’s discussion of this case are salient to
the contemporary discussion. The first, of course, is the view that,
if I am incapable of recalling having done this or that, then the
person responsible for the action in question is not the person I am,
even if the person who is responsible for that action occupied the
same human animal presently occupied by the person I am (see Johansson
2016, D. Shoemaker 2009, 2016, and Sauchelli 2017a). The second is the
idea that the first-person pronoun can refer equivocally in a way that
 tracks the human/person distinction (see
 section 3.2).

A host of interpretive questions can be raised concerning the
historical distinction between human animals and persons, and some of
these may be of interest to participants in the contemporary debate
between animalism and its rivals. For example, whether Locke’s
distinction reflects a conceptual or an ontological difference remains
a point of controversy amongst historians of the period (e.g., Bolton
1994; Chappell 1989; Thiel 1997 and 1998). But setting aside these
scholarly matters, the features of Locke’s distinction that are
uncontroversially endorsed by Locke as well as especially relevant for
the current debate include the following:

our capacities for self-consciousness and rationality are tied not
to our being human animals, but to our being persons;
 the locus of moral responsibility is not the human animal, but
the person;
 persons, but not human animals, persist just in case their
psychological states are linked in appropriate ways; and
 during the course of its life, a human animal may coincide with
zero, one, or more than one person, and something need not be a human
animal in order to be occupied by a person (e.g., Locke’s
rational parrot).

2.2 Animalism and the Human/Person Distinction

It should be emphasized at this point that animalists do not deny that
there is a distinction to be drawn between human animals and persons.
This, in part, is why the formulation of (1) that is sometimes
ascribed to animalists—“persons are human
animals”—is misleading. In fact, there are several aspects
of Locke’s discussion that animalists uphold.

For example, animalists often ally their answer to the persistence
question with Locke’s identity criteria for human animals (e.g.,
Olson 2007: 28). Of course, since organic animalists affirm and
somatic animalists deny that being alive is a necessary condition of
our persistence, Locke cannot be an ally to both camps. For his part,
D. Mackie (1999b: 235–39) classifies Locke as an organicist.
However, enough passages from the Essay suggest otherwise
(some of which Mackie himself acknowledges—e.g., in
II.xxvii.4–5) that the more circumspect conclusion may be that
Locke was either inconsistent or just ambivalent on the matter.
Animalists are also sympathetic to Locke’s account of
personhood—albeit with a different understanding of the type of
concept person is—and this alternative understanding
allows animalists to endorse element (d) above.

What animalists reject is Locke’s claim that
‘person’ names a sortal concept (e.g., Snowdon 2014: ch.
3). Rather, following Olson (1997: ch. 2), most animalists insist that
‘person’ names only a phase sortal concept (or
status concept, see Hacker 2007). (The idea of a
“phased sortal”, as he called them, is due to Wiggins
[1967, 2001].) Unlike a sortal concept, which determines the
persistence conditions of its instances, a phase sortal concept is a
concept to which its instances belong temporarily, for only a phase of
their existence (e.g., teenager). Simply by reaching a
particular age, for example, something that was not a teenager can
become a teenager without ceasing to exist. Likewise, something that
was a teenager can cease to be a teenager without ceasing to exist. So
too, animalists say, with person. Personhood, they claim, is
a phase that something begins upon acquiring the psychological
capacities that Locke identifies (self-consciousness and rationality)
and concludes upon losing those capacities. In this way, being a
person is a matter of what something can do, rather than what
something is. In Olson terminology, person is a
“functional kind”, akin to locomotor (1997:
31–37). A locomotor is anything that is able to move about under
its own power, be it a garden slug or a ballistic missile. Likewise,
Olson argues (following Locke), a person is anything that is able to
think in certain ways—anything that “is rational, …
ordinarily conscious and aware of itself as tracing a path through
time and space, … [and] morally accountable for its
actions” (1997: 32). Many things besides human animals can be
persons on this view: an angel, a god, a machine, an animal, an
immaterial soul, an alien, etc.. In the case of human animals, we
ordinarily become persons not at conception or at birth, but around
the age of two. And while it is possible for a human animal to go out
of existence at the same moment that she ceases to be a person (e.g.,
if she steps on an active landmine), it is also possible for a human
animal to continue existing long after he has ceased to be a person
(e.g., if he lapses into a persistent vegetative state).
2.3 Animalism(s) vs. Neo-Lockeanism(s)

Animalism’s principal rival is not infrequently identified as
“neo-Lockeanism”. This way of staging the debate dates
back at least as far as a prominent exchange between Noonan (1998,
2001) and D. Mackie (1999a). Also, the first monograph dedicated to
animalism mounts a sustained attack on the “psychological
approach” to personal identity—an approach whose
“best-known advocate … is, of course, Locke” (Olson
1997: 20). And the “animalism vs. neo-Lockeanism”
opposition remains common in contemporary discussions (e.g., S.
Campbell 2001; Hershenov 2012; Johnston 2010; Robinson 2016; S.
Shoemaker 2008).

In one respect, setting things up in this way is fairly harmless.
Views classified as “neo-Lockean” share a common
commitment to a psychological criterion of personal identity (whether
that criterion requires direct psychological connectedness or merely
overlapping chains of psychological continuity) that animalists
universally oppose. But ultimately, the simple “animalism vs.
neo-Lockeanism” dichotomy is too coarse-grained and exclusionary
to provide a particularly informative taxonomy of the contemporary
debate. For example, whilst all animalists resist a psychological
criterion of persistence, the distinction between organic and somatic
animalisms
 (section 1.2)
 shows us that the source of this resistance varies significantly.
And, as the list given above indicates
 (section 1.1),
 animalism’s answer to the fundamental nature question is
opposed by a wide range of views, not all of which are properly
classified as neo-Lockean. Moreover, as we shall see in what follows,
the “neo-Lockeanism” label both obscures importantly
different varieties of neo-Lockeanism and ignores different rationales
given for those views.

Whilst a comprehensive taxonomy of alternatives to animalism is
neither feasible nor necessary in the present context, one step in the
right direction would be to differentiate those neo-Lockean views that
rely on the notion of material constitution from those that do not.
Those that do—call this type of view “constitutionalist
neo-Lockeanism”—are today regarded as the leading
opposition to animalism. Advocates of this form of neo-Lockeanism
(including Baker, Johnston, and S. Shoemaker) contend that each of us
“is” an animal only in the sense that (according to some)
a statue “is” the piece of marble, viz. by being
materially colocated and yet distinguished by one or more modal,
temporal, and/or relational properties. On this view, we are persons
non-identically constituted by human animals.

Despite this common reliance on the notion of material constitution,
there are significant differences between the views advocated by
animalism’s constitutionalist neo-Lockean opponents. According
to S. Shoemaker (1984), for instance, it is the capacity for thought
that distinguishes the mental subject you are from the human animal
that constitutes you. Partly because it is embedded within his
broader, functionalist response to the mind/body problem,
Shoemaker’s arguments against animalism and animal thought are
complex (see
 section 3.2
 for further discussion). But roughly, on his view, animals are
incapable of thinking because they do not persist under the
appropriate conditions. Psychological continuity is sufficient for the
persistence of any being endowed with the capacity to think, and since
psychological continuity is not sufficient for a (human) animal to
persist, animals are not thinking beings. And because each of us is a
thinking being, we are not animals. (For a thorough presentation of
Shoemaker’s most recent thinking on this topic, see his 1999,
2004, 2008, 2011, 2016.)

Perhaps the most extensive elaboration of the constitutionalist
approach has been given by Baker (2000, 2002, 2007). On her view, the
property that distinguishes the persons we are from the human animals
that constitute us is a form of self-consciousness that she calls the
“first-person perspective” (2000: ch. 3). It is from this
perspective that “one thinks of oneself as an individual facing
a world, as a subject distinct from everything else”; it is what
enables us “to conceive of one’s body and mental states as
one’s own” (2000: 60, 4). On her view, persons have their
first-person perspectives essentially, and they “persist as long
as [their] first-person perspectives are exemplified” (2016: 51;
see also 2000: 132–41).

At the heart of this view is what Baker has recently labeled her
“Key Distinction” (2007: 43; 2016: 53). Constitutionalists
maintain that constituting objects (e.g., pieces of marble) and
constituted objects (e.g., statues) can share some of their
properties. For instance, a statue shares its physical and aesthetic
properties with the piece of marble that constitutes it; likewise,
Baker will claim, a person shares its physical and psychological
properties with the human animal that constitutes it. But these
objects cannot share all of their properties in the same way, or else
there would be no difference between the constituting and the
constituted. So Baker draws an exhaustive and mutually exclusive
distinction between two ways that objects can instantiate properties:
derivatively or nonderivatively. Roughly, an object has a property
derivatively if it instantiates it only in virtue of being colocated
with another object, whereas an object instantiates a property
nonderivatively if it instantiates that property independently of
being colocated with another object. We might express this distinction
more perspicuously as follows. If one object (x) constitutes
another object (y) and both objects instantiate some property
(F), then

 x (the constituting object) instantiates F
nonderivatively in the event it would instantiate F even if it
did not constitute y (the constituted object);
 y instantiates F nonderivatively in the event that
x would fail to instantiate F if x did not
constitute y; and
 y instantiates F derivatively in the event that
x would instantiate F even if it did not constitute
y.


Consider, for example, a marble statue of a giant ogre. In this case,
(i) the piece of marble instantiates the property of being three
meters tall nonderivatively (because it would be three meters tall
even if it did not constitute the statue); (ii) the statue
instantiates the property of being ugly nonderivatively (because the
piece of marble with which it is colocated would not be ugly if it did
not constitute a statue); and (iii) the statue instantiates the
property of being three meters tall derivatively (because the piece of
marble would be three meters tall even if it did not constitute the
statue). (Still more precise elaborations of Baker’s Key
Distinction are given in her 2000: 46–58 and 2007: 166–69.
A number of critics have argued that the distinction generates more
heat than light; see, e.g., Hershenov 2009; Olson 2007: ch. 3;
Zimmerman 2002; and contributions to the 
Field Guide to the Philosophy of Mind 
online symposium on Baker 2000.)

Baker argues by analogy that, as it goes for marble statues, so it
goes for human persons. On her view, each of us is an animal, but
(contra the animalist) only derivatively. Baker’s
answer to the fundamental nature question is that we are persons; each
of us possesses the first-person perspective essentially and
nonderivatively. In the course of ordinary development, a human animal
develops increasingly sophisticated psychological capacities (just
like the piece of marble develops aesthetic characteristics as the
sculptor chisels away at it). Once these capacities include a
first-person perspective, a person comes into existence, and this
person is constituted by the human animal (2000: 115–16; cf.
2007: 72–82). Since the animal would not have a first-person
perspective if it did not come to constitute the person, it shares
this perspective with the person in the same way that the piece of
marble shares the property of being ugly with the statue of the ogre,
viz. derivatively.

On Baker’s view, the first-person perspective is unique to
persons. Without this perspective, she argues, a being cannot refer to
itself using first-person pronouns, for this ability requires that one
be able to conceive of oneself both as the subject of mental events
and as the object that embodies the subject of those events. Because
the human animal that constitutes you possesses a first-person
perspective only derivatively, then, it is unable to self-refer. That
said, Baker does not claim that person-constituting human animals lack
cognitive and experiential capacities altogether. Nor does she claim
that they possess these capacities only derivatively. Like many of the
“higher” nonhuman animals, human animals are subjects of
an array of mental phenomena, including pains and pleasures, beliefs
and desires. Such phenomena require not the “strong” or
“robust” first-person perspective characteristic of
persons, but only what Baker calls a “weak” or
“rudimentary” first-person perspective—roughly, the
capacity to experience the world from an egocentric point of view
(2000: 60–64). And just as the statue inherits the property of
being three meters tall from the piece of marble, so too the person
possesses these lesser psychological capacities only derivatively
because the human animal would possess these capacities even if it did
not constitute the person.

Neo-Lockean resistance to animalism that is not linked to
constitutionalism is an even more diverse lot. One of the prevailing
views in the non-constitutionalist neo-Lockeanism category rejects
animalism by identifying the person with a proper part of the human
animal—typically, the brain or one of its (spatial or temporal)
parts. On this view, the human animal thinks only derivatively, in
virtue of having a thinking brain as a part. Among those who advocate
views along this line are Puccetti (1973), Persson (1999), McMahan
(2002), Hudson (2001), and more recently Parfit (2012). Animalist
responses to these views are given by Hershenov (2005b, 2016) and
Olson (2007: ch. 4). Also relevant are the various thought experiments
raised by non-constitutionalist neo-Lockeans (e.g., Lewis 1976; Parfit
1984) that seem to count against animalism; for instance, thought
experiments involving teletransportation and transplantation. See
 section 3.4
 for some discussion of these cases.
3. Arguments for and Objections to Animalism

Particularly when introduced in isolation, animalism—especially
(1)—might strike one as obviously true. In his book-length
treatment of the view, Snowdon demonstrates at length how animalism
“represents the default conception of ourselves” (2014:
106). And in an earlier article, he notes:


The central claim of animalism is in some ways a curious proposition
to assert. It is natural to respond to its assertion in the words of
Wittgenstein: “Only whom are we informing of this? And on what
occasion?”. (1995: 72; Wittgenstein 1953: 101e)


Olson echoes this sentiment, writing that we certainly


seem to be animals. When you eat or sleep or talk, a human
animal eats, sleeps, or talks. When you look in the mirror, and animal
looks back at you. Most ordinary people suppose that we are animals.
… Compared with [competing] proposals, the idea that we are
animals looks like plain common sense. (2007: 23)


But common sense will not settle the issue because some of
animalism’s rivals are supported by other, equally intuitive
considerations. In addition to common sense, then, what arguments can
be marshaled in support of animalism?
3.1 Thinking Animal Argument

The standard argument for (1) is variously referred to as the
“thinking animal argument” (Olson 1997, 2003), the
“too many minds objection” (S. Shoemaker 1999), the
“two lives objection” (S. Campbell 2006), and the
“too many thinkers problem” (Parfit 2012: 7). It was
developed by Snowdon (1990: 91), Carter (1988), McDowell (1997: 237),
and Ayers (1991, vol. 2: 283). It has since been sharpened and
popularized by Olson (1997: 106–09, 2003: 325–30, 2007:
29–39). Here it is:

(P1)Presently sitting
in your chair is a human animal.
(P2)The human animal
sitting in your chair is thinking.
(P3)You are the
thinking being sitting in your chair.
(C)Therefore, the
human animal sitting in your chair is you.


Whilst none of (P1), (P2), and (P3) is incontestable, nor is any one
of them easily contested. Save perhaps for far-reaching metaphysical
reasons (e.g., an antecedent commitment to idealism), few would deny
the very existence of animals, nor the fact that a perfectly good
specimen of the species Homo sapiens is presently seated in
your chair. So (P1) is not easily rejected.

Moreover, concerning (P2), since it would be odd (to say the least) to
deny that human animals think while accepting that porpoises and
porcupines do, and since we can assume that the human animal in your
chair is not atypical of its kind, whatever reasons one has for
accepting that various nonhuman animals think apply equally to the
human animal in your chair. While there are those who deny (in a
sense) that any animal can think (e.g., Descartes, Johnston, S.
Shoemaker), their positions strain empirical credibility and/or depend
on fairly sophisticated metaphysical machinery. At first glance,
anyway, (P2) is much easier to accept.

(P3) is also difficult to resist, since its denial would seem to
require positing the existence of a thinking being in your chair other
than yourself. For if (P1) and (P2) are true, and if it is true that
you exist and are thinking, then denying (P3) results in the
implication that you are but one of (at least) two thinkers seated in
your chair. Such a view faces a host of difficult questions: practical
questions (e.g., which of these beings owns the car parked out
front?), epistemic questions (how do you determine which of these
beings you are?), linguistic questions (to which of these beings do
instances of the first-person pronoun refer?), ontological questions
(what is the relationship between you and the qualitatively identical
being with which you are associated?), and so on. These challenges
have not passed unnoticed, and serious attempts have been made to
address them. But, the animalist says, the trouble can be avoided from
the start simply by conceding the truth of (P3).

So, while not necessarily unanswerable or insurmountable, the
questions and problems that await one who rejects any of (P1) through
(P3) are not insignificant. Animalism, then, has at least this much
going for it.
3.2 Replies to the Thinking Animal Argument

Not all replies to the thinking animal argument have focused
exclusively on, or even addressed themselves directly, to one or the
other of the three premises that make up that argument. Nevertheless,
many replies to animalism do concern questions raised by the thinking
animal argument and may fruitfully be seen as addressing one or
another of its premises.

For instance, according to Baker’s (2000, 2007) constitution
view, (P3) should be rejected, since “thinking being sitting in
your chair” is ambiguous as between the constituted person who
thinks nonderivatively and the constituting human animal who thinks
derivatively
 (section 2.3).
 And Noonan (1998, 2001) also detects an ambiguity in (P2) and (P3).
According to his revisionist view of personal pronoun use,
first-person thoughts and utterances refer only to persons, not to
animals. On his view, we must distinguish between the referent of
first-person thoughts and utterances, on the one hand, and the thinker
of those thoughts and utterances, on the other hand. Noonan does not
deny that the human animal sitting in your chair is capable of
first-personal thinking. Nor does he deny that such thoughts (and the
utterances that express them) successfully refer. But he does insist
that, when the animal has a first-person thought or utters
‘I’, that thought or utterance refers not to the animal
who thinks the thought but to the person with whom the animal shares
its thoughts. (For further discussion, see Noonan 2012 and Olson
2002a, 2007: 37–39.)

And, although not initially developed as a response to the thinking
animal argument, S. Shoemaker’s (1984, 1999, 2004) view
represents a direct and formidable challenge to (P2). On his account,
the human animal sitting in your chair is not thinking because no
animal is capable of thinking. This in turn is because the capacity
for thought requires persistence conditions that all animals, human or
otherwise, lack: “mental properties”, Shoemaker writes,
“can belong only to things having psychological persistence
conditions” (2004: 528). A thinker’s psychological states
play characteristic causal roles, and these states (in combination
with others) tend to cause the thinking being whose states they are to
behave in certain ways. Thus, for example, the state of being in pain
may be caused by bodily damage of some kind and may dispose the one
who is in pain to cry out or recoil.

The linchpin of Shoemaker’s view is his claim that the causal
role of any psychological state as well as any other states involved
in that causal role must all be states of one and the same thinking
being (1999: 300). In other words, the effects typically brought about
by a being’s psychological states cannot fail to occur in that
very being. Olson summarizes the consequence of this commitment as
follows:


if your cerebrum gets put into my head tomorrow, your current mental
states will have their characteristic effects in the being who ends up
with that organ, and not in the empty-headed thing left behind. By
Shoemaker’s reasoning, the subject of those
states—you—must therefore be the being who ends up with
your transplanted cerebrum. Any being whose later states or actions
are caused in the appropriate way by your current mental states must
be you. In other words, psychological continuity of a sort must
suffice for you or any other mental being to persist through time.
Since no sort of psychological continuity suffices for any organism to
persist … it follows that no organism could have mental
properties. The nature of mental properties makes it metaphysically
impossible for animals to think. (Olson 2007: 33–34.)


Shoemaker’s functionalist theory of mind has received
considerable attention in the philosophy of mind. His view that
animals cannot think and the implications of that claim for the
thinking animal argument are discussed in Árnadóttir
2010, Hershenov 2006, Olson 2002b, and S. Shoemaker 2004, 2008, 2011,
2016.

Beyond these discussions of (P2) and (P3), much of the recent
discussion concerning animalism has focused on such questions as
whether one or more than one thinker is sitting in your chair; if more
than one, which one is doing the thinking; and in what sense.
Zimmerman (2008), for instance, objects to (P1) by noting that the
rationale for the claim that a human animal is located where you
are—in effect, that it is just obvious that there is an instance
of the species Homo sapiens currently located where you
are—extends equally to such things as “mere hunk of
matter”, “mere body”, “psychological
person”, and the like. Since the animalist does not accept that
we are identical to any of these non-animals, the evident truth of
(P1) will not be sufficient to establish the thinking animal
argument’s conclusion. What is required, in other words, is not
simply a reason for believing that (P1) is true—animalists, let
us assume, are correct in insisting that few would deny it—but
also a reason for denying the presence of other things besides a human
animal. This is the “rival candidates problem”.

Closely related to this problem is another. The “thinking parts
problem” charges that, even if you are a thinking being, no
reason has been given to suppose that you are a thinking
animal rather than any of the other thinking beings currently
located where you are. To begin, consider all the parts of a human
animal that are plausibly regarded as thinking: the head, the brain,
the right-leg complement (i.e., the entire animal body minus the right
leg), the entire animal from the waist up (torso, neck, and head), the
left-arm complement minus a single electron in the animal’s
liver, the left-arm complement minus a different electron in the
animal’s liver, etc. For each of these thinking parts, an
argument structurally analogous to the thinking animal argument could
be constructed. For instance:

(P1′)There is a
human head currently located where you are.
(P2′)The human
head currently located where you are is thinking.
(P3′)You are the
thinking being located in your chair.
(C′)Therefore,
the human head located where you are is you.


Likewise:

(P1″)There is a
torso-neck-and-head currently located where you are.
(P2″)The
torso-neck-and-head currently located where you are is
thinking.
(P3′)You are the
thinking being located in your chair.
(C″)Therefore,
the torso-neck-and-head located where you are is you.


And so on. If the thinking animal argument were sound, then it would
follow (per impossibile) that you are identical with each of
an infinite number of nonidentical thinking parts. Since you could be
identical with no more than one of those things, and since the
animalist has provided no principled explanation for why you are the
whole animal and not one or another of the animal’s thinking
parts, the thinking animal argument should be rejected.

Much of the discussion about animalism has been concerned with the
rival candidates and thinking parts problems. (See, for instance,
Blatti 2016; Lowe 2001; Madden 2016a; Olson 2007: 215–19 and
2015; Parfit 2012; Yang 2015.) One line of response draws on van
Inwagen’s (1990) view of composite material beings. According to
van Inwagen’s answer to what he calls the “special
composition question”, the only composite objects that exist are
living organisms. Only a living organism unifies the particles that
compose it at any given moment, on this view. Such things as
“mere hunk of matter” and “right-leg
complement” are gerrymandered objects. And since they are not
genuine composite objects, they are neither genuine rivals nor genuine
thinkers. Olson (2008: 38–42) is, however, quick to acknowledge
that this riposte will be welcomed only by those antecedently
persuaded of van Inwagen’s view. And proponents of the rival
candidates and thinking parts problems are particularly unlikely to
count among van Inwagen’s supporters.
3.3 Animal Ancestors Argument

Even if these objections to the thinking animal argument can be
answered, there is some irony in the fact that the fate of the
hallmark argument for animalism should hang in the balance of disputes
over the nature of mental properties and the individuation of
thinkers. Thought is an essential ingredient not in animalism’s
theory of our fundamental nature, but in the theories advanced by
animalism’s neo-Lockean rivals. It is precisely our capacity for
thought that animalists deny is essential to us; on the contrary,
animalists say, each of us was once a non-thinking fetus and each of
us may yet become a non-thinking persistent-vegetative-state
patient.

Thus, a second argument attempts to ground animalism’s defense
in a broader naturalistic context. The “animal ancestors
argument” takes the form of a reductio. If (1) is false and we
are not animals, then nor are our parents animals, in which case nor
are our parents’ parents, nor our parents’ grandparents,
and so on, as far back as our ancestries extend. But in that case, the
falsity of animalism entails the rejection of evolutionary theory (or
at least that theory’s applicability to us), since it denies
that our distant ancestries includes beings who were animals. But,
since the rejection of evolutionary theory is too high a price to pay,
it is instead the assumption of animalism’s falsity that ought
to be rejected. Whilst Blatti (2012) argues that this argument
withstands a number of extant objections, it also faces challenges
(Daly and Liggins 2013, Gillett 2013).
3.4 Further Objections, Implications, and Questions

The rival candidates and thinking parts problems are instances of what
we might call “multiplication objections” to animalism.
These objections try to demonstrate how advocates of animalism are
committed to claiming (or incapable of denying) that one thing (you or
me, say) is identical to each of two or more things. Yet another such
objection is inspired by a rare type of conjoined twinning called
dicephalus, which occurs when a human zygote divides only partially
before implanting in the uterine wall. The result is twins conjoined
below the neck. These twins look like a two-headed person, with
distinct heads and necks sprouting from a single torso (Miller 1996).
According to McMahan (2002: 35), because a pair of dicephalic twins is
two people but only one animal, dicephalic twins appear to present a
walking, talking counterexample to animalism’s hallmark claim,
(1). (For further discussion, see Blatti 2007; T. Campbell and McMahan
2016; Liao 2006; Olson 2014; Reid 2016.)

Other objections aim to reveal animalism’s counterintuitive
verdicts concerning the seemingly endless litany of fantastical
thought experiments (many of them updated versions of Locke’s
prince-cobbler case, see
 section 2.1)
 debated in the recent personal identity literature (S. Shoemaker
1963; Lewis 1976; Wiggins 1980; Parfit 1984). In one scenario, we are
to imagine removing all or part (e.g., cerebrum) of your brain and
transplanting it into a different (brain-less or cerebrum-less) human
animal, with the (ex hypothesi) result that your
psychological life and characteristics are continued in a different
animal from the one you presently occupy. Another scenario envisions a
similar feat via fanciful technology that can record all of your brain
states and transfer that information into a different animal’s
brain (previously wiped clean). Still another thought experiment
imagines transporting you à la Star Trek by creating a
blueprint of your physical and psychological states at one location,
destroying you, and then replicating you at some distant location by
creating a new object with all of the same physical and psychological
states.

The differences between the details of these thought experiments are
not insignificant. But for present purposes, let us collect them
together under the label “transfer objections”, since the
intuition all of them aim to arouse is that you can be
relocated from one animal or location to another as a result of the
processes described, so long as your memories, beliefs, desires,
character traits, etc. are preserved. If the transferability intuition
is correct, then (1) cannot be true, since psychological continuity is
not sufficient for the persistence of a human animal. Indeed, for any
of the procedures described in these cases—brain-transplant,
brain-state transplant, teletransportation—given the choice
between undergoing this procedure and annihilation, animalism entails
that there is no self-interested reason to prefer the former.

The felt conviction of our prima facie beliefs about what
would happen in these scenarios seems undeniable. Moreover, there is
evidence to suggest that intuitions supporting some version of the
psychological criterion are not only firmly felt, but quite common
(Nichols and Bruno 2010). So how do animalists respond? While many
animalists will concede the intuitions we have about these and other
cases, they will also point out that we harbor many other
pre-philosophical commitments besides. We are, for instance, strongly
inclined to believe that many animals (human and otherwise) are
capable of thinking (including remembering, believing, desiring,
etc.). Likewise, we believe that there is just one thinker located
where each of us is. But if, say, the intuition in the
brain-transplant case is correct and you go with your brain when it
gets transplanted into another body, then either the human animal left
behind was never capable of thinking (since the brain was thinking and
there was only one thinker in the vicinity) or there were multiple
thinkers thinking your thoughts prior to the transplant (your animal
and your brain). Surely these implications offend our
pre-philosophical beliefs about ourselves too. Consequently, if there
are answers to be had to the fundamental nature and persistence
questions, then it is likely that those answers will reveal some of
our pre-philosophical convictions to be correct, others not. (For
further discussion, see Gendler 2002; Madden 2016b; Olson 1997;
Snowdon 1991, 1995, 2014: chs. 10–11; and Wilkes 1988. And see
Snowdon 2003 for a more thorough taxonomy of objections to
animalism.)

Finally, beyond its contribution to the ancient debate over personal
identity, animalism raises practical questions of great contemporary
significance. For example, animalists are committed to claiming that
each of us was once or might someday become a non-person (e.g., a
fetus in a mother’s womb, a hospital patient in a persistent
vegetative state). How are we to reconcile these implications of a
metaphysical view with our ethical commitments regarding abortion and
euthanasia? More generally, if animalism is correct, then our
fundamental nature is indistinguishable from that of blue whales, myna
birds, bonobo chimpanzees, and ring-tailed lemurs. How, in the light
of this metaphysical view, are the ethical, legal, and policy debates
that assume a sharp human/animal (us/them) contrast to be
recalibrated? Such questions are only beginning to be explored (see,
e.g., Johansson 2016; Sauchelli forthcoming, 2017a: ch. 5; D.
Shoemaker 2009, 2013, 2016).


====================================================================================================
TITLE: Anselm of Canterbury
====================================================================================================
TOC:



1. Life and Works
2. The Theistic Proofs

2.1 “Faith Seeking Understanding”: The character and purpose of Anselm’s theistic proofs
2.2 The arguments of the Monologion
2.3 The argument of the Proslogion


3. The Divine Nature

3.1 Proving the divine attributes
3.2 The consistency of the divine attributes


4. Freedom, Sin, and Redemption

4.1 Truth in statements and in the will
4.2 Freedom and sin
4.3 Grace and redemption


Bibliography

Critical Edition
Translations
Secondary Literature


Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries





TEXT:

1. Life and Works

Anselm was born in 1033 near Aosta, in those days a Burgundian town on
the frontier with Lombardy. Little is known of his early life. He left
home at twenty-three, and after three years of apparently aimless
travelling through Burgundy and France, he came to Normandy in 1059.
Once he was in Normandy, Anselm’s interest was captured by the
Benedictine abbey at Bec, whose famous school was under the direction
of Lanfranc, the abbey’s prior. Lanfranc was a scholar and
teacher of wide reputation, and under his leadership the school at Bec
had become an important center of learning, especially in dialectic.
In 1060 Anselm entered the abbey as a novice. His intellectual and
spiritual gifts brought him rapid advancement, and when Lanfranc was
appointed abbot of Caen in 1063, Anselm was elected to succeed him as
prior. He was elected abbot in 1078 upon the death of Herluin, the
founder and first abbot of Bec. Under Anselm’s leadership the
reputation of Bec as an intellectual center grew, and Anselm managed
to write a good deal of philosophy and theology in addition to his
teaching, administrative duties, and extensive correspondence as an
adviser and counselor to rulers and nobles all over Europe and beyond.
His works while at Bec include the Monologion
(1075–76), the Proslogion (1077–78), and his four
philosophical dialogues: De grammatico (probably
1059–60, though the dating of this work is much disputed), and
De veritate, De libertate arbitrii, and De casu
diaboli (1080–86).

In 1093 Anselm was enthroned as Archbishop of Canterbury. The previous
Archbishop, Anselm’s old master Lanfranc, had died four years
earlier, but the King, William Rufus, had left the see vacant in order
to plunder the archiepiscopal revenues. Anselm was understandably
reluctant to undertake the primacy of the Church of England under a
ruler as ruthless and venal as William, and his tenure as Archbishop
proved to be as turbulent and vexatious as he must have feared.
William was intent on maintaining royal authority over ecclesiastical
affairs and would not be dictated to by Archbishop or Pope or anyone
else. So, for example, when Anselm went to Rome in 1097 without the
King’s permission, William would not allow him to return. When
William was killed in 1100, his successor, Henry I, invited Anselm to
return to his see. But Henry was as intent as William had been on
maintaining royal jurisdiction over the Church, and Anselm found
himself in exile again from 1103 to 1107. Despite these distractions
and troubles, Anselm continued to write. His works as Archbishop of
Canterbury include the Epistola de Incarnatione Verbi (1094),
Cur Deus Homo (1095–98), De conceptu virginali
(1099), De processione Spiritus Sancti (1102), the
Epistola de sacrificio azymi et fermentati (1106–7),
De sacramentis ecclesiae (1106–7), and De
concordia (1107–8). Anselm died on 21 April 1109. He was
canonized in 1494 and named a Doctor of the Church in 1720.
2. The Theistic Proofs
2.1 “Faith Seeking Understanding”: The character and purpose of Anselm’s theistic proofs

Anselm’s motto is “faith seeking understanding”
(fides quaerens intellectum). This motto lends itself to at
least two misunderstandings. First, many philosophers have taken it to
mean that Anselm hopes to replace faith with understanding.
If one takes ‘faith’ to mean roughly ‘belief on the
basis of testimony’ and ‘understanding’ to mean
‘belief on the basis of philosophical insight’, one is
likely to regard faith as an epistemically substandard position; any
self-respecting philosopher would surely want to leave faith behind as
quickly as possible. The theistic proofs are then interpreted as the
means by which we come to have philosophical insight into things we
previously believed solely on testimony. But Anselm is not hoping to
replace faith with understanding. Faith for Anselm is more a
volitional state than an epistemic state: it is love for God and a
drive to act as God wills. In fact, Anselm describes the sort of faith
that “merely believes what it ought to believe” as
“dead” (M 78). (For the abbreviations used in
references, see the Bibliography below.) So “faith seeking
understanding” means something like “an active love of God
seeking a deeper knowledge of God.”

Other philosophers have noted that “faith seeking
understanding” begins with “faith,” not with doubt
or suspension of belief.  Hence, they argue, the theistic
arguments proposed by faith seeking understanding are not really meant
to convince unbelievers; they are intended solely for the edification
of those who already believe.  This too is a misreading of
Anselm’s motto. For although the theistic proofs are borne of an
active love of God seeking a deeper knowledge of the beloved, the
proofs themselves are intended to be convincing even to unbelievers.
Thus Anselm opens the Monologion with these words:

If anyone does not know, either because he has not heard or because he
does not believe, that there is one nature, supreme among all existing
things, who alone is self-sufficient in his eternal happiness, who
through his omnipotent goodness grants and brings it about that all
other things exist or have any sort of well-being, and a great many
other things that we must believe about God or his creation, I think
he could at least convince himself of most of these things by reason
alone, if he is even moderately intelligent. (M 1)


And in the Proslogion Anselm sets out to convince “the
fool,” that is, the person who “has said in his heart,
‘There is no God’ ” (Psalm 14:1; 53:1).
2.2 The arguments of the Monologion

Having clarified what Anselm takes himself to be doing in his theistic
proofs, we can now examine the proofs themselves. In the first chapter
of the Monologion Anselm argues that there must be some one
thing that is supremely good, through which all good things have their
goodness. For whenever we say that different things are F in
different degrees, we must understand them as being F through
F-ness; F-ness itself is the same in each of them.
Thus, for example, all more or less just things “must be more or
less just through justice, which is not different in diverse
things” (M 1). Now we speak of things as being
good in different degrees. So by the principle just stated,
these things must be good through some one thing. Clearly that thing
is itself a great good, since it is the source of the goodness of all
other things. Moreover, that thing is good through itself;
after all, if all good things are good through that thing, it follows
trivially that that thing, being good, is good through itself. Things
that are good through another (i.e., things whose goodness derives
from something other than themselves) cannot be equal to or greater
than the good thing that is good through itself, and so that which is
good through itself is supremely good. Anselm concludes,
“Now that which is supremely good is also supremely great. There
is, therefore, some one thing that is supremely good and supremely
great – in other words, supreme among all existing things”
(M 1). In chapter 2 he applies the principle of chapter 1 in
order to derive (again) the conclusion that there is something
supremely great.

In chapter 3 Anselm argues that all existing things exist through some
one thing. Every existing thing, he begins, exists either through
something or through nothing. But of course nothing exists through
nothing, so every existing thing exists through something. There is,
then, either some one thing through which all existing things exist,
or there is more than one such thing. If there is more than one,
either (i) they all exist through some one thing, or (ii) each of them
exists through itself, or (iii) they exist through each other. (iii)
makes no sense. If (ii) is true, then “there is surely some one
power or nature of self-existing that they have in order to exist
through themselves” (M 3); in that case, “all
things exist more truly through that one thing than through the
several things that cannot exist without that one thing”
(M 3). So (ii) collapses into (i), and there is some one
thing through which all things exist. That one thing, of course,
exists through itself, and so it is greater than all the other things.
It is therefore “best and greatest and supreme among all
existing things” (M 3).

In chapter 4 Anselm begins with the premise that things “are not
all of equal dignity; rather, some of them are on different and
unequal levels” (M 4). For example, a horse is better
than wood, and a human being is more excellent than a horse. Now it is
absurd to think that there is no limit to how high these levels can
go, “so that there is no level so high that an even higher level
cannot be found” (M 4). The only question is how many
beings occupy that highest level of all. Is there just one, or are
there more than one? Suppose there are more than one. By hypothesis,
they must all be equals. If they are equals, they are equals through
the same thing. That thing is either identical with them or distinct
from them. If it is identical with them, then they are not in fact
many, but one, since they are all identical with some one thing. On
the other hand, if that thing is distinct from them, then they do not
occupy the highest level after all. Instead, that thing is greater
than they are. Either way, there can be only one being occupying the
highest level of all.

Anselm concludes the first four chapters by summarizing his
results:

Therefore, there is a certain nature or substance or essence who
through himself is good and great and through himself is what he is;
through whom exists whatever truly is good or great or anything at
all; and who is the supreme good, the supreme great thing, the supreme
being or subsistent, that is, supreme among all existing things.
(M 4)


He then goes on (in chapters 5–65) to derive the attributes that
must belong to the being who fits this description. But before we look
at Anselm’s understanding of the divine attributes, we should
turn to the famous proof in the Proslogion.
2.3 The argument of the Proslogion

Looking back on the sixty-five chapters of complicated argument in the
Monologion, Anselm found himself wishing for a simpler way to
establish all the conclusions he wanted to prove. As he tells us in
the preface to the Proslogion, he wanted to find

a single argument that needed nothing but itself alone for proof, that
would by itself be enough to show that God really exists; that he is
the supreme good, who depends on nothing else, but on whom all things
depend for their being and for their well-being; and whatever we
believe about the divine nature. (P, preface)


That “single argument” is the one that appears in chapter
2 of the Proslogion. (Or so it is commonly said: but some
interpreters understand the “one argument” as extending
into chapter 3, and Holopainen 1996 argues that it is the
formula “that than which a greater cannot be
thought.”)

The proper way to state Anselm’s argument is a matter of
dispute, and any detailed statement of the argument will beg
interpretative questions. But on a fairly neutral or consensus reading
of the argument (which I shall go on to reject), Anselm’s
argument goes like this. God is “that than which a greater
cannot be thought”; in other words, he is a being so great, so
full of metaphysical oomph, that one cannot so much as conceive of a
being who would be greater than God. The Psalmist, however, tells us
that “The fool has said in his heart, ‘There is no
God’ ” (Psalm 14:1; 53:1). Is it possible to convince the
fool that he is wrong? It is. All we need is the characterization of
God as “that than which a greater cannot be thought.” The
fool does at least understand that definition. But whatever is
understood exists in the understanding, just as the plan of a painting
he has yet to execute already exists in the understanding of the
painter. So that than which a greater cannot be thought exists in the
understanding. But if it exists in the understanding, it must also
exist in reality. For it is greater to exist in reality than to exist
merely in the understanding. Therefore, if that than which a greater
can be thought existed only in the understanding, it would be possible
to think of something greater than it (namely, that same being
existing in reality as well). It follows, then, that if that than
which a greater cannot be thought existed only in the understanding,
it would not be that than which a greater cannot be thought; and that,
obviously, is a contradiction. So that than which a greater cannot be
thought must exist in reality, not merely in the understanding.

Versions of this argument have been defended and criticized by a
succession of philosophers from Anselm’s time through the
present day (see
 ontological arguments).
 Our concern here is with Anselm’s own version, the criticism he
encountered, and his response to that criticism. A monk named Gaunilo
wrote a “Reply on Behalf of the Fool,” contending that
Anselm’s argument gave the Psalmist’s fool no good reason
at all to believe that that than which a greater cannot be thought
exists in reality. Gaunilo’s most famous objection is an
argument intended to be exactly parallel to Anselm’s that
generates an obviously absurd conclusion. Gaunilo proposes that
instead of “that than which a greater cannot be thought”
we consider “that island than which a greater cannot be
thought.” We understand what that expression means, so
(following Anselm’s reasoning) the greatest conceivable island
exists in our understanding. But (again following Anselm’s
reasoning) that island must exist in reality as well; for if it did
not, we could imagine a greater island – namely, one that
existed in reality – and the greatest conceivable island would
not be the greatest conceivable island after all. Surely, though, it
is absurd to suppose that the greatest conceivable island actually
exists in reality. Gaunilo concludes that Anselm’s reasoning is
fallacious.

Gaunilo’s counterargument is so ingenious that it stands out as
by far the most devastating criticism in his catalogue of
Anselm’s errors. Not surprisingly, then, interpreters have read
Anselm’s reply to Gaunilo primarily in order to find his
rejoinder to the Lost Island argument. Sympathetic interpreters (such
as Klima 2000 and Ward 2018) have offered ways for Anselm to respond,
but at least one commentator (Wolterstorff 1993) argues that Anselm
offers no such rejoinder, precisely because he knew Gaunilo’s
criticism was unanswerable but could not bring himself to admit that
fact.

A more careful look at Anselm’s reply to Gaunilo, however, shows
that Anselm offered no rejoinder to the Lost Island argument because
he rejected Gaunilo’s interpretation of the original argument of
the Proslogion. Gaunilo had understood the argument in the
way I stated it above. Anselm understood it quite differently. In
particular, Anselm insists that the original argument did not rely on
any general principle to the effect that a thing is greater when it
exists in reality than when it exists only in the
 understanding.[1]
 And since that is the principle that does the mischief in
Gaunilo’s counterargument, Anselm sees no need to respond to the
Lost Island argument in particular.

Correctly understood, Anselm says, the argument of the
Proslogion can be summarized as follows:

That than which a greater cannot be thought can be thought.
If that than which a greater cannot be thought can be thought, it
exists in reality.


Therefore,

That than which a greater cannot be thought exists in
reality.


Anselm defends (1) by showing how we can form a conception of that
than which a greater cannot be thought on the basis of our experience
and understanding of those things than which a greater can be
thought. For example,

it is clear to every reasonable mind that by raising our thoughts from
lesser goods to greater goods, we are quite capable of forming an idea
of that than which a greater cannot be thought on the basis of that
than which a greater can be thought. Who, for example, is unable to
think … that if something that has a beginning and end is good,
then something that has a beginning but never ceases to exist is much
better? And that just as the latter is better than the former, so
something that has neither beginning nor end is better still, even if
it is always moving from the past through the present into the future?
And that something that in no way needs or is compelled to change or
move is far better even than that, whether any such thing exists in
reality or not? Can such a thing not be thought? Can anything greater
than this be thought? Or rather, is not this an example of forming an
idea of that than which a greater cannot be thought on the basis of
those things than which a greater can be thought? So there is in fact
a way to form an idea of that than which a greater cannot be thought.
(Anselm’s Reply to Gaunilo 8)


Once we have formed this idea of that than which a greater cannot be
thought, Anselm says, we can see that such a being has features that
cannot belong to a possible but non-existent object – or, in
other words, that (2) is true. For example, a being that is capable of
non-existence is less great than a being that exists necessarily. If
that than which a greater cannot be thought does not exist, it is
obviously capable of non-existence; and if it is capable of
non-existence, then even if it were to exist, it would not be that
than which a greater cannot be thought after all. So if that than
which a greater cannot be thought can be thought – that is, if
it is a possible being – it actually exists. (This reading of
the argument of the Proslogion is developed at length in
Visser and Williams 2008, chapter 5.)
3. The Divine Nature
3.1 Proving the divine attributes

Recall that Anselm’s intention in the Proslogion was to
offer a single argument that would establish not only the existence of
God but also the various attributes that Christians believe God
possesses. If the argument of chapter 2 proved only the existence of
God, leaving the divine attributes to be established piecemeal as in
the Monologion, Anselm would consider the Proslogion
a failure. But in fact the concept of that than which nothing greater
can be thought turns out to be marvelously fertile. God must, for
example, be omnipotent. For if he were not, we could conceive of a
being greater than he. But God is that than which no greater can be
thought, so he must be omnipotent. Similarly, God must be just,
self-existent, invulnerable to suffering, merciful, timelessly
eternal, non-physical, non-composite, and so forth. For if he lacked
any of these qualities, he would be less than the greatest conceivable
being, which is impossible.

The ontological argument thus works as a sort of
divine-attribute-generating machine. Admittedly, though, the
appearance of theoretical simplicity is somewhat misleading. The
“single argument” produces conclusions about the divine
attributes only when conjoined with certain beliefs about what is
greater or better. That is, the ontological argument tells us that God
has whatever characteristics it is better or greater to have than to
lack, but it does not tell us which characteristics those are. We must
have some independent way of identifying them before we can plug them
into the ontological argument and generate a full-blown conception of
the divine nature. Anselm identifies these characteristics in part by
appeal to intuitions about value, in part by independent argument. To
illustrate Anselm’s method, I shall examine his discussions of
God’s impassibility, timelessness, and simplicity.

According to the doctrine of divine impassibility, God is invulnerable
to suffering. Nothing can act upon him; he is in no way passive. He
therefore does not feel emotions, since emotions are states that one
undergoes rather than actions one performs. Anselm does not find it
necessary to argue that impassibility is a perfection; he
thinks it is perfectly obvious that “it is better to be …
impassible than not” (P 6), just as it is perfectly
obvious that it is better to be just than not-just. His intuitions
about value are shaped by the Platonic-Augustinian tradition of which
he was a part. Augustine took from the Platonists the idea that the
really real things, the greatest and best of beings, are stable,
uniform, and unchanging. He says in On Free Choice of the
Will 2.10, “And you surely could not deny that the
uncorrupted is better than the corrupt, the eternal than the temporal,
and the invulnerable than the vulnerable”; his interlocutor
replies simply, “Could anyone?” Through Augustine (and
others) these ideas, and the conception of God to which they naturally
lead, became the common view of Christian theologians for well over a
millennium. For Anselm, then, it is obvious that a being who is in no
way passive, who cannot experience anything of which he is not himself
the origin, is better and greater than any being who can be acted upon
by something outside himself. So God, being that than which nothing
greater can be thought, is wholly active; he is impassible.

Notice that Augustine also found it obvious that the eternal is better
than the temporal. According to Plato’s Timaeus, time
is a “moving image of eternity” (37d). It is a shifting
and shadowy reflection of the really real. As later Platonists,
including Augustine, develop this idea, temporal beings have their
existence piecemeal; they exist only in this tiny sliver of a now,
which is constantly flowing away from them and passing into
nothingness. An eternal being, by contrast, is (to use my earlier
description) stable, uniform, and unchanging. What it has, it always
has; what it is, it always is; what it does, it always does. So it
seems intuitively obvious to Anselm that if God is to be that than
which nothing greater can be thought, he must be eternal. That is, he
must be not merely everlasting, but outside time
 altogether.[2]

In addition to this strong intuitive consideration, Anselm at least
hints at a further argument for the claim that it is better to be
eternal than temporal. He opens chapter 13 of the Proslogion
by observing, “Everything that is at all enclosed in a place or
time is less than that which is subject to no law of place or
time” (P 13). His idea seems to be that if God were in
time (or in a place), he would be bound by certain constraints
inherent in the nature of time (or place). His discussion in
Monologion 22 makes the problem clear:

This, then, is the condition of place and time: whatever is enclosed
within their boundaries does not escape being characterized by parts,
whether the sort of parts its place receives with respect to size, or
the sort its time suffers with respect to duration; nor can it in any
way be contained as a whole all at once by different places or times.
By contrast, if something is in no way constrained by confinement in a
place or time, no law of places or times forces it into a multiplicity
of parts or prevents it from being present as a whole all at once in
several places or times. (M 22)


So at least part of the reason for holding that God is timeless is
that the nature of time would impose constraints upon God, and of
course it is better to be subject to no external constraints.

The other part of the reason, though, is that if God were in place or
time he would have parts. But what is so bad about having
parts? This question brings us naturally to the doctrine of divine
simplicity, which is simply the doctrine that God has no parts of any
kind. Even for an Augustinian like Anselm, the claim that it is better
to lack parts than to have them is less than intuitively compelling,
so Anselm offers further arguments for that claim. In the
Proslogion he argues that “whatever is composed of
parts is not completely one. It is in some sense a plurality and not
identical with itself, and it can be broken up either in fact or at
least in the understanding” (P 18). The argument in the
Monologion goes somewhat differently. “Every
composite,” Anselm argues, “needs the things of which it
is composed if it is to subsist, and it owes its existence to them,
since whatever it is, it is through them, whereas those things are not
through it what they are” (M 17). The argument in the
Proslogion, then, seeks to relate simplicity to the intuitive
considerations that identify what is greatest and best with what is
stable, uniform, and unchanging; the argument in the
Monologion, by contrast, seeks to show that simplicity is
necessary if God is to be – as the theistic proofs have already
established – the ultimate source of his own goodness and
existence.
3.2 The consistency of the divine attributes

Anselm’s success in generating a whole host of divine attributes
through the ontological argument does present him with a
problem.  He must show that the attributes are consistent with
each other – in other words, that it is possible for one and the
same being to have all of them. For example, there seems at first
glance to be a conflict between justice and omnipotence. If God is
perfectly just, he cannot lie. But if God is omnipotent, how can there
be something he cannot do? Anselm’s solution is to explain that
omnipotence does not mean the ability to do everything; instead, it
means the possession of unlimited power. Now the so-called
“ability” or “power” to lie is not really a
power at all; it is a kind of weakness. Being omnipotent, God has no
weakness. So it turns out that omnipotence actually entails
the inability to lie.

Another apparent contradiction is between God’s mercy and his
justice. If God is just, he will surely punish the wicked as they
deserve. But because he is merciful, he spares the wicked. Anselm
tries to resolve this apparent contradiction by appeal to God’s
goodness. It is better, he says, for God “to be good both to the
good and to the wicked than to be good only to the good, and it is
better to be good to the wicked both in punishing and in sparing them
than to be good only in punishing them” (P 9). So
God’s supreme goodness requires that he be both just and
merciful. But Anselm is not content to resolve the apparent tension
between justice and mercy by appealing to some other attribute,
goodness, that entails both justice and mercy; he goes on to argue
that justice itself requires mercy. Justice to sinners obviously
requires that God punish them; but God’s justice to
himself requires that he exercise his supreme goodness in sparing
the wicked. “Thus,” Anselm says to God, “in saving
us whom you might justly destroy … you are just, not because
you give us our due, but because you do what is fitting for you who
are supremely good” (P 10). In spite of these
arguments, Anselm acknowledges that there is a residue of mystery
here:

Thus your mercy is born of your justice, since it is just for you to
be so good that you are good even in sparing the wicked. And perhaps
this is why the one who is supremely just can will good things for the
wicked. But even if one can somehow grasp why you can will to save the
wicked, certainly no reasoning can comprehend why, from those who are
alike in wickedness, you save some rather than others through your
supreme goodness and condemn some rather than others through your
supreme justice. (P 11)


In other words, the philosopher can trace the conceptual relations
among goodness, justice, and mercy, and show that God not only can but
must have all three; but no human reasoning can hope to show why God
displays his justice and mercy in precisely the ways in which he does.
(For a detailed and sympathetic reconstruction of Anselm’s
arguments concerning justice and mercy, see Mann 2019.)
4. Freedom, Sin, and Redemption
4.1 Truth in statements and in the will

In On Freedom of Choice (De libertate arbitrii)
Anselm defines freedom of choice as “the power to preserve
rectitude of will for its own sake” (DLA 3). He
explores the notion of rectitude of will most thoroughly in On
Truth (De veritate), so in order to understand the
definition of freedom of choice, we must look first at Anselm’s
discussion of truth. Truth is a much broader notion for Anselm than
for us; he speaks of truth not only in statements and opinions but
also in the will, actions, the senses, and even the essences of
things. In every case, he argues, truth consists in correctness or
“rectitude.” Rectitude, in turn, is understood
teleologically; a thing is correct whenever it is or does whatever it
ought, or was designed, to be or do. For example, statements are made
for the purpose of “signifying that what-is is”
(DV 2). A statement therefore is correct (has rectitude)
when, and only when, it signifies that what-is is. So Anselm holds a
correspondence theory of truth, but it is a somewhat unusual
correspondence theory. Statements are true when they correspond to
reality, but only because corresponding to reality is what statements
are for. That is, statements (like anything else) are true
when they do what they were designed to do; and what they were
designed to do, as it happens, is to correspond to reality.

Truth in the will also turns out to be rectitude, again understood
teleologically. Rectitude of will means willing what one ought to will
or (in other words) willing that for the sake of which one was given a
will. So, just as the truth or rectitude of a statement is the
statement’s doing what statements were made to do, the truth or
rectitude of a will is the will’s doing what wills were made to
do. In DV 12 Anselm connects rectitude of will to both
justice and moral evaluation. In a broad sense of ‘just’,
whatever is as it ought to be is just. Thus, an animal is just when it
blindly follows its appetites, because that is what animals were meant
to do. But in the narrower sense of ‘just’, in which
justice is what deserves moral approval and injustice is what deserves
reproach, justice is best defined as “rectitude of will
preserved for its own sake” (DV 12). Such rectitude
requires that agents perceive the rectitude of their actions and will
them for the sake of that rectitude. Anselm takes the second
requirement to exclude both coercion and “being bribed by an
extraneous reward” (DV 12). For an agent who is coerced
into doing what is right is not willing rectitude for its own sake;
and similarly, an agent who must be bribed to do what is right is
willing rectitude for the sake of the bribe, not for the sake of
rectitude.

Since, as we have already seen, Anselm will define freedom as
“the power to preserve rectitude of will for its own
sake,” the arguments of On Truth imply that freedom is
also the capacity for justice and the capacity for moral
praiseworthiness. Now it is both necessary and sufficient for justice,
and thus for praiseworthiness, that an agent wills what is right,
knowing it to be right, because it is right. That an agent wills what
is right because it is right entails that he is neither compelled nor
bribed to perform the act. Freedom, then, must be neither more nor
less than the power to perform acts of that sort.
4.2 Freedom and sin

Thus Anselm takes it to be obvious that freedom is a power
for something: its purpose is to preserve rectitude of will
for its own sake. God and the good angels cannot sin, but they are
still free, because they can (and do) preserve rectitude of will for
its own sake. In fact, they are freer than those who can sin:
“someone who has what is fitting and expedient in such a way
that he cannot lose it is freer than someone who has it in such a way
that he can lose it and be seduced into what is unfitting and
inexpedient” (DLA 1). It obviously follows, as Anselm
points out, that freedom of choice neither is nor entails the power to
sin; God and the good angels have freedom of choice, but they are
incapable of sinning.

But if free choice is the power to hold on to what is fitting and
expedient, and it is not the power to sin, does it make any sense to
say that the first human beings and the rebel angels sinned through
free choice? Anselm’s reply to this question is both subtle and
plausible. In order to be able to preserve rectitude of will for its
own sake, an agent must be able to perform an action that has its
ultimate origin in the agent him- or herself rather than in some
external source. (For convenience I will refer to that power as
“the power for self-initiated action.”) Any being that has
freedom of choice, therefore, will thereby have the power for
self-initiated action. The first human beings and the rebel angels
sinned through an exercise of their power for self-initiated action,
and so it is appropriate to say that they sinned through free
choice.  Nonetheless, free choice does not entail the power to
sin. For free choice can be perfected by something else, as yet
unspecified, that renders it incapable of sinning.

In On the Fall of the Devil (De casu diaboli) Anselm
extends his account of freedom and sin by discussing the first sin of
the angels. In order for the angels to have the power to preserve
rectitude of will for its own sake, they had to have both a will for
justice and a will for happiness. If God had given them only a will
for happiness, they would have been necessitated to will whatever they
thought would make them happy. Their willing of happiness would have
had its ultimate origin in God and not in the angels themselves. So
they would not have had the power for self-initiated action, which
means that they would not have had free choice. The same thing would
have been true, mutatis mutandis, if God had given them only
the will for justice.

Since God gave them both the will for happiness and the will for
justice, however, they had the power for self-initiated action.
Whether they chose to subject their wills for happiness to the demands
of justice or to ignore the demands of justice in the interest of
happiness, that choice had its ultimate origin in the angels; it was
not received from God. The rebel angels chose to abandon justice in an
attempt to gain happiness for themselves, whereas the good angels
chose to persevere in justice even if it meant less happiness. God
punished the rebel angels by taking away their happiness; he rewarded
the good angels by granting them all the happiness they could possibly
want. For this reason, the good angels are no longer able to sin.
Since there is no further happiness left for them to will, their will
for happiness can no longer entice them to overstep the bounds of
justice. Thus Anselm finally explains what it is that perfects free
choice so that it becomes unable to sin.
4.3 Grace and redemption

Like the fallen angels, the first human beings willed happiness in
preference to justice. By doing so they abandoned the will for justice
and became unable to will justice for its own sake. Apart from divine
grace, then, fallen human beings cannot help but sin. Anselm claims
that we are still free, because we continue to be such that if we had
rectitude of will, we could preserve it for its own sake; but we
cannot exercise our freedom, since we no longer have the
rectitude of will to preserve. (Whether fallen human beings also
retain the power for self-initiated action apart from divine grace is
a tricky question, and one I do not propose to answer here.)

So the restoration of human beings to the justice they were intended
to enjoy requires divine grace. But even more is needed than
God’s restoration of the will for justice. In Cur Deus
Homo (Why God Became A Human Being, or Why the
God-Man?) Anselm famously attempts to show on purely rational
grounds that the debt incurred by human sin could be suitably
discharged, and the affront to God’s infinite dignity could be
suitably rectified, only if one who was both fully divine and fully
human took it upon himself to offer his own life on our behalf.


